# STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION

CRISTÓBAL LOYOLA

ABSTRACT. In this article we prove semiglobal stabilization and exact controllability results for non-linear plate equations with hinged boundary conditions and analytic nonlinearity. These results hold when the damping or control is localized in a region where observability for the linear Schrödinger equation is known to hold. At the core of these results lies a new unique continuation property for the nonlinear plate equation, which significantly relaxes the geometric conditions required for such property to hold. This property is obtained by combining recent results on propagation of analyticity in time and unique continuation for linear plate operators. More broadly, our approach exploits the linear observability of the plate equation to establish both stabilization and control results. First, we prove exponential decay of the nonlinear energy under a defocusing assumption on the nonlinearity. Second, under a weaker asymptotic assumption on the nonlinearity, we prove semiglobal exact control by analyzing control properties inside the compact attractor provided by the dynamics of the damped equation.

# CONTENTS

1. Introduction.........................................................................1

2. Preliminaries.........................................................................7

3. Unique continuation and equilibriums................................................12

4. Stabilization and long time dynamics.................................................14

5. Semiglobal controllability............................................................18

Appendix A. Nonlinear composition estimates...........................................24

Appendix B. Dynamical systems........................................................25

References..............................................................................26

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Let (M,g) be a smooth compact connected Riemannian manifold of dimension d≤3with (possibly empty) smooth boundary ∂M. In this article we consider the following nonlinear plate equation

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}u+\Delta_{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=0\\
u_{\left.\right|_{\mathcal{M}}}=\Delta u_{\left.\right|_{\mathcal{M}}}=0\\
\left(u,\partial_{t}u\right)(0)=\left(u_{0},u_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{1.1}\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

where (u0,u1)∈(H2(M)∩H01(M))∩L2(M) and equipped with hinged boundary conditions whenever∂M≠\emptyset. Here the nonlinearityf:M×R→R is assumed to be smooth in the first variable and analytic in the second one. Furthermore, depending on the situation we consider, it will satisfy assumptions that constrain the dynamics of (1.1). In the model, the constantβ≥0is so that we have the Poincaré-like inequality, we thus may requireβ&gt;0when∂M=\emptyset.

Date: November 24,2025.

2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 35B40,35B41,93B05,93D20,35B60,35L75.

Key words and phrases. damped plate equation, exponential stabilization, compact global attractor, internal con-trol, unique continuation, semilinear plate equation.

<!-- 1 -->

<!-- S707 AON ICIaP LRu] IA89tLILISC:AXT -->

<!-- 2 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

Models of the form (1.1) are Kirchhoff-Love thin-plate equations with a local nonlinearity, de-scribing the transverse deflection of a thin plate and capturing material or contact effects. In this article,we study internal stabilization and internal control for (1.1) when the system is acted upon by either a localized damping term (interpreted as local frictional damping) or a localized control input (interpreted as a distributed transverse load). We refer to [LL88, Lag89] for further details on the phenomenology of such systems, as well as for early results on control and stabilization.The validity of our results holds whenever the damping or control is supported in a nonempty open set 3⊂Msatisfyinh the following assumption:

Assumption 1. The Schrödinger equation is observable inL2from w in time T&gt;0:there exists C=C(T,ω)&gt;0such that for anyv0∈L2(M)it holds

$$\left\|v_{0}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|\mathbb {1}_{ω}e^{it\Delta _{g}}v_{0}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt$$

We point out right away that the sharp geometric condition on w necessary for the observabil-ity of the Schrödinger equation remains an open question. Yet, it has been the object of many investigations. In the following situations, Assumption 1 is known to be true for anyT&gt;0

(1)(M,g) is a compact Riemannian manifold with or without boundary and w satisfies the Geometric Control Condition. See Lebeau [Leb92].

(2)(M,g)=((0,1)d,.Euclid) withd≤3,w is any nonempty open set. This was first proved by Jaffard ford=2[Jaf90] and Komornik [Kom92] for other dimensions (actually directly for the beam equation). Other proofs have also been given later by Burq-Zworski [BZ04], Anantharaman-Macià [AM14]. Note here that the proofs are given for the torusTd,but an easy argument of symmetrization allows to recover the same result for the Dirichlet boundary condition.

(3) (M,g)=(D,,Euclid) is the Euclidean closed disk inR2andω∩∂M≠\emptyset.See Anantharaman, Léautaud and Macià [ALM16,Theorem 1.2],

(4)(M,g) is the Bunimovich stadium and ω controls geometrically M\M\R,,R being the rect-angular part, see Burq-Zworski [BZ04, Theorem 9].

(5)(M,g) is a compact, boundaryless connected Riemannian surface whose flow has the Anosov property, w is any nonempty open set. See Dyatlov-Jin-Nonnenmacher [DJN22, Theorem 5].

(6) (M,g) is a compact, boundaryless Riemannian manifold of dimension d and constant cur-vature=-1,and the observationCψ=aψis made through a smooth function a on M such that the set{ρ∈S*M|a2(Φt(ρ))=0. ∀t∈R}has Hausdorff dimension&lt;.HereΦtis the bicharacteristic flow onT*M. See Anantharaman-Rivière [AR12, Theorem 2.5].

Remark 1.1. Observability of linear Schrödinger equations in unbounded domains has also been object of several studies, we refer to Prouff [Pro25] and the references therein.

Compared to the current literature on stabilization and control of nonlinear plates like (1.1),our results widely improve the geometric conditions for which such results hold true. In this direction,we point out that most available results assume some sort of multiplier-type condition on the damping or control zone, which is known to be stronger than, for instance, the Geometric Control Condition [Mil03]. Let us explain the origin of our assumption and the difficulties previously encountered in the literature.

To fix ideas, consider the stabilization problem with a defocusing nonlinearity. It is well known that the decay of the energy of the damped system (see (1.2) below) is equivalent to proving an observability inequality for the nonlinear equation. In our situation, this compactness-uniqueness strategy can be roughly summarized as follows:

linear observability +unique continuation→nonlinear observability.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 3 -->

Although not explicitly, this scheme was introduced by Dehman, Lebeau and Zuazua [DLZ03] to stabilize the semilinear defocusing wave equation inR3with damping active outside a ball. Further-more, this strategy has been successfully employed for both the wave and Schrödinger equations in different geometric settings [DGL06, Lau10,JL13,JL20,Per23]. When it comes to our case,as it has already been noticed by several authors, the plate operator with hinged boundary conditions can be decomposed into two Schrödinger-type operators∂t2+Δg2=(i∂t-Δg)(i∂t+Δg),showing that both operators might share similar properties. In this direction, the link between the linear observability of the Schrödinger and the plate equation is now rather well-understood after Lebeau [Leb92], who introduced a rather general strategy to transfer observability inequalities from the Schrödinger to the plate equation, see [LL24, Section 4]. See also Miller [Mil12] for the connection between the observability of linear waves and Schrödinger-like equations. Here, as done under the GCC in the context of the wave and Schrödinger equations, we perform the propagation arguments by exploiting the linear observability inequality along with the compactness properties of the non-linearity, the latter being inherited from the well-posedness framework. When it comes to unique continuation for the nonlinear plate equation, the situation is far less understood and most of the available results in the literature hold under rather restrictive geometric conditions, as they are derived from Carleman-estimates-based strategies. In this article we prove unique continuation for the nonlinear plate equation by combining recent results on unique continuation for linear plate operators by Filippas, Laurent, and Léautaud [FLL25] and propagation of analyticity in time from Laurent and the author [LL24]. We can roughly state that this strategy can be carried out when-ever observability for the linear equation holds and the nonlinearity is analytic and enjoys some compactness property, hence explaining Assumption 1. In this spirit, new observability results for the Schrödinger equation in bounded domains, will most likely automatically widen the validity of our results.

Regarding semiglobal control, by time reversibility of the equation, it is known that it can be deduced by combining stabilization of the damped equation along with nonlinear local control around 0. If we instead relax the defocusing assumption to an asymptotic defocusing condition, the long-time dynamics of the equation become more complicated and the previous strategy does not work as the damped plate may have nontrivial equilibria. However, following Joly and Laurent [JL14],we can use the unique continuation property to prove that the damped plate generates a gradient system and admits a compact global attractor. From this fact, a control strategy can be implemented to prove semiglobal control by studying the controllability properties inside this compact attractor.

1.1. **Main** **results.** We describe our main results below. First, we state the global stabilization result whenever a localized damping term +γ2(x)∂t is added to (1.1) and the nonlinearity is assumed to be analytic and defocusing. When such a defocusing assumption is relaxed by a similar asymptotic condition, we can prove the semiglobal control of the system by studying the attractor of the damped plate combined with a local control result around equilibria. Finally, we describe the unique continuation result for (1.1) whenever the solution is observed to be zero in a zone from where Assumption 1 holds.

1.1.1. Semiglobal stabilization. **Let** us consider the following nonlinear plate with localized damping

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}u+\Delta_{g}^{2}u+\beta u+\gamma^{2}(x)\partial_{t}u+f(x,u)=0\\
u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=\Delta u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=0\\
\left(u,\partial_{t}u\right)(0)=\left(u_{0},u_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,+\infty )\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{1.2}\quad (t,x)\in [0,+\infty )x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

<!-- 4 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

whereγ∈C∞(M)satisfiesγ(x)≥γ0&gt;0forx∈ω.Here we assume thatf(·,0)=0and that it satisfies the defocusing assumption

$$sf(x,s)\geq 0\quad \text {if}\partial \mathcal {M}\neq \emptyset ,\tag{1.3}\quad sf(x,s)\geq αs^{2}\quad \text {if}\partial \mathcal {M}=\emptyset ,$$

for someα&gt;0and for all(x,s)∈M×R.

The nonlinear energyE∈C0(HD2xL2(M),R+)associated to (1.2) is given by

$$E\left(u,\partial _{t}u\right):=\frac {1}{2}\int _{\mathcal {M}}\left(\left|\partial _{t}u\right|^{2}+|\Delta u|^{2}+\beta |u|^{2}\right)dx+\int _{\mathcal {M}}V(x,u)dx,$$

where $V(x,u)=\int _{0}^{u}f(x,s)ds$ .Sinced≤3,due to Sobolev embedding the energy E is well-defined. Moreover, if n solves (1.2), formally we have the identity

$$\partial _{t}E\left(u,\partial _{t}u\right)=-\int _{\mathcal {M}}γ^{2}(x)\left|\partial _{t}u\right|^{2}dx\leq 0,\tag{1.4}$$

which tell us that the energy E is non-increasing along the trajectories. We are interested in the following property:

(ED)for anyE0≥0,there existC&gt;0andλ&gt;0such that, for any solution n of (1.2) with

E(U(0))≤E0,it holdsE(U(t≤Ce-λtE(U(0

This property means that the damping term+γ∂tustabilizes any solution of (1.2) to 0 at an exponential rate which depends on the size of the data. Our first main theorem is the following.

**Theorem** **1.2.** Assume that w satisfy Assumption 1. If f is real analytic in the second variable and it satifies (1.3),then the exponential decay property **(ED)**holds.

The previous result follows by proving an appropriate observability inequality for the nonlinear energy of (1.2), see Theorem 2.8 below. As we already pointed out, we obtain the desired ob-servability by a compactness-uniqueness method, where we exploit the linear observability of the plate equation and the unique continuation property for nonlinear plates. With this strategy,the constant C and the decay rate λ of the nonlinear energy both depend on the size of the initial data R0. However, it might be possible to get the decay rate to be uniform with respect to the size of the data: we know that solutions are small for large time, therefore the nonlinear term could be neglected yielding almost the same decay rate as in the linear equation. See for instance [LRZ10] for the case of the KdV equation. The possibility of dropping the dependence of C with respect toR0is an open problem. We refer to Le Balc'h and Martin [BM25], where uniform global stabilization for the subcritical Schrödinger equation on the torus was obtained by a direct method using nonlinear Carleman estimates and Morawetz-type estimates.

### 1.1.2. Dynamics and controllability. Let us now introduce the following controlled system

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}u+\Delta_{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=\mathbb{1}_{\tilde{\omega}}g\\
\left.u\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}=\Delta u_{\mid \mathcal{M}}=0\\
\left(u,\partial_{t}u\right)(0)=\left(u_{0},u_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\partial \mathcal {M},\tag{1.5}\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

withg∈L∞([0,T],L2(M))and\widetildeω⊂Msome nonempty open set. In this section, we relax (1.3) by an asymptotic assumption on the nonlinearity,that is, we assume that there existsR&gt;0such that

f(x,0)=0for everyx∈∂M and sf(x,s)≥0 for every (x,s)∈Mx{|s|≥R} (1.6)

The controllability result is the following.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 5 -->

**Theorem** **1.3.** Let f be analytic in the second variable and satisfy condition (1.6).Let wSubset\widetildeωbe two nonempty open sets such that w satisfies Assumption 1 in time T0&gt;0.For any bounded setB.⊂HD2×L2(M) there existsT(B)&gt;0 such that for any(u0,u1) and(\widetildeu0,\widetildeu1) in B,there existT∈(0,TB) and a controlg∈L∞([0,T],L2(M))supported in(0,T)x\widetildeωsuch that the unique solution(u,∂tu)∈C0([0,T],HD2xL2(M))of(1.5)satisfies(u(T),∂tu(T))=(\widetildeu0,\widetildeu1)

A well-known strategy to obtain semiglobal control in the defocusing case withf(·,0)=0,as before, is based on the time reversibility of the equation. Indeed, it combines the decay of the energy wvith a local control to achieve the target 0, which in turn allows us to reach any target by time reversibility. Note, however, that the asymptotic condition (1.6) is weaker than the defocusing condition (1.3), and thus the long-time dynamics of the equation is more complicated, allowing the existence of nontrivial equilibria. Following [JL14], it is possible to implement a control strategy in the presence of more involved dynamics, as a consequence of (1.6). In this direction, the previous control result relies on the existence and description of a global attractor for the damped system (1.2) and on a local exact control property around an equilibrium.

**Theorem** **1.4.** Let f be analytic in the second variable and satisfy condition (1.6). If w satisfies Assumption 1 then the dynamical system generated by the damped plate equation (1.2) inHD2×L2(M is gradient and admits a compact global attractor A.

The main idea is that under assumption (1.6), solutions of the damped plate (1.2) arrive close to the attractor A for large time. Then, by combining local control around equilibrium points and using heteroclinic connections to travel from one equilibrium to another within the attractor, we can still obtain global controllability by using the time reversibility of the system. We refer to Raugel [Rau02] for concepts and main results on dynamical systems of PDEs. We have gathered the ones that will be employed in this article in Section B.

Few results in the literature address the global exact controllability of nonlinear plate equations, among which we mention the following. Lasiecka and Triggiani [LT91] considered globally Lipschitz nonlinearities with a control acting on the entire boundary, relying on linear results and a suitable global inversion theorem. Zhang [Zha01] studied a nonlinearity with superlinear growth, where the analysis relied on deriving suitable observability estimate for a plate equation with potential via Carleman estimates. Eller and Toundykov [ET15] examined several semilinear plate models with an internal control acting on a collar neighborhood of the boundary, with their method relying partly on uniform stabilization through a suitable feedback. For a comprehensive summary of results on nonlinear plates up to 2015, we refer the reader to the that article.

1.1.3. Unique continuation property. As it was already explained, a key property to establish the aforementioned results is the one of unique continuation for solutions of (1.1).

**Theorem** **1.5.** Let f be real analytic in the second variable.Let0&lt;T0&lt;T andωSubset\widetildeωare two nonempty open sets such that w satisfies Assumption 1 in time T0.If one solutionU=(u,∂tu)∈C0([0,T],HD2xL2(M))of(.)satisfies∂u=0in[0,T]×\widetildeω,then∂tu=0in[0,T]×M and u is an equtilibrium point of (1.1), that is, solution of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\Delta _{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=0\\ u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0\end{array}\right.\quad \quad x\in \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \partial \mathcal {M}\tag{1.7}$$

If,moreover, the nonlinearity f satisfies the defocusing assumption (1.3),then u=0

To our knowledge, most available unique continuation results for linear plates mostly rely on Carleman estimates, requiring strong geometrical assumptions related to pseudoconvexity but low regularity on the coefficients, see for instance Isakov [Isa97]. See also [LTY03, Wan07, ET15, IM25] and the references therein for works addressing Carleman estimates for plate equations with different boundary conditions. In this direction, Filippas, Laurent, and Léautaud [FLL25] obtained a unique continuation result for the linear plate operator with lower-order terms assuming Gevrey-2 regularity in time and allowing fairly general geometries. This has to be compared with the remarkable theorem of Tataru [Tat95, Tat99], Robbiano-Zuily [RZ98] and Hörmander [Hör97], which notably does not apply to the plate operator [FLL25, Appendix B].

<!-- 6 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

When moving towards nonlinear results of this kind, very few results are available, and those mostly rely on results for the linear equation. Here, we hinge on a recent result due to Laurent and the author [LL24, Theorem 1.6], in which the nonlinear structure of the equation plays a crucial role to propagate analyticity in time from the vanishing zone to the full solution. This allows us to achieve the desired regularity needed to apply the aforementioned unique continuation result for linear plates. Hence, Theorem 1.5 substantially improves upon the existing literature on unique continuation for nonlinear plates, with respect to the geometric conditions under which suich a property holds.

Remark 1.6. The results presented so far are most likely to be true in higher dimensions≥4under further assumptions on the growth of nonlinearity f (and its derivative). For instance, in dimensiond=4,since we are no longer able to use the embeddingHD2ookigtaowL∞ we might need to assume polynomial growth on f. In this way, the nonlinear energy could be controlled by the linear energy and the nonlinearity might still enjoy the needed compactness properties, similar to Theorem 2.4 below. Ford≥5,the situation becomes more complicated as it may require the use of appropriate Strichartz estimates, which, To our knowledge are not available for plates equation in the geometries we are concerned with. We mention Pausader [Pau07] for Strichartz estimates in the euclidean spaceR

1.1.4. Brief literature. Given the extensive literature on the topic, we mainly focus on results con-cerning nonlinear models. More precisely, for stabilization and control results on plates, our main references are Eller and Toundykov [ET15] and Tucsnak, Bournissou and Ervedoza [TBE24], as well as the references therein.

Unless stated otherwise, the following results all hold in dimensiond=2,with damping/control zone equal to a full collar neighborhood of the boundary. In [ET15], the authors studied uniform stabilization and control properties of nonlinear plates with a variety of boundary conditions,no-tably including models with strictly dissipative polynomial nonlinearity and the Berger plate model. We also mention [CT09] where local control for Berger plates was obtained under the assumption that the linear system is controllable. Studying models such as (1.1) might open the path toward treating more challenging models such as the Von Kármán plate equation, whose nonlinearity is [u,Φ(u,u)]where Φ is the Airy stress function. Regarding the long-time dynamics and existence of compact attractors for Von Kármán and Berger plates with a variety of boundary conditions,we refer to Geredeli, Lasiecka and Webster [GLW13] and Geredeli and Webster [GW13],respectively. In these works, a nonlinear damping is considered and is emphasized that the unique continuation for such nonlinear models is a challenging problem. For a thorough study of long-time dynamics of Von Kármán models, we refer to the monograph of Chueshov and Lasiecka [CL10].

Regarding control properties, instead assuming the more general Geometric Control Condition and keeping hinged boundary conditions, in [TBE24] the local exact controllability is proved around analytic equilibria for the Von Kármán plate equation. A similar result on local control around equi-librium for the Berger equation was also obtained. We point out that, although the previous results might directly share the same framework, by employing the aforementioned control strategy it might be possible to combine the long-time dynamics results with the local control around equilibrium to obtain semiglobal control of these models. In other words, an extension of Theorem 1.4 might lead to a semiglobal controllability result within the geometric framework of the present article for such models.

In the previous paragraphs, by 'variety of boundary conditions' we mean the three main boundary conditions encountered in the literature for plate equations: hinged, clamped and free. Although some of the previous results addressed these types of boundary conditions, it is quite challenging to obtain general results encompassing all of them. For instance, trying to translate our results to the clamped case is already an interesting problem, since, not only is the linear observability not well understood, but to our knowledge, there is no general unique continuation result available for the linear clamped plate. However, although we heavily rely on the Schrödinger decomposition of the plate operator, we believe that our analysis and the abstract propagation result of [LL24] might shed light on the study of the more involved boundary conditions. In this direction, we also refer to the work of Le Rousseau and Zongo [LRZ23] regarding the stabilization of the damped linear plate equation with boundary conditions satisfying the Lopatinskiï-Sapiro condition. There,by means of microlocal analysis and resolvent estimates, the authors proved that, under no geometric assumption on the damping, the decay rate is at most logarithmic. To our knowledge, there is no result for nonlinear plates under such general boundary conditions.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 7 -->

1.2. **Outline** **of** **the** **article.** Section 2 introduce some necessary preliminaries about the plate equation. Section 3 we prove Theorem 1.5 of unique continuation. Section 4 is devoted to the study of the damped plate equation (1.2), where we prove Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 1.4. Section 5 is devoted to the controllability result and contains the proof of Theorem 1.3.

1.3. **Acknowledgments.** I would like to thank Camille Laurent for drawing my attention to this problem, as well as for the helpful discussions, encouragement, and patient guidance.

This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innova-tion programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 945332.

## 2. PRELIMINARIES

**2.1.Well-posedness.Let**A0=-Δgbe the Laplace-Beltrami operator, equipped with Dirichlet boundary conditions if∂M≠\emptyset.Recall thatA0:D(A0)→L2(M)is a self-adjoint and nonnegative operator. In this case, its domain is given byD(A0)=H2(M)∩H01(M)oL2(M).SetX= D(A0)xL2(M)and introduce the densely defined operatorA:D(A)→Xgiven by

$$\boldsymbol {A}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}0&I\\ -A_{0}^{2}-\beta I&0\end{array}\right)\quad with\quad \quad D(\boldsymbol {A})=D\left(A_{0}^{2}\right)xD\left(A_{0}\right)$$

Fors≥0,we introduce the scale of Sobolev spacesHDs=D((-Δg)s/2)equipped with the inner product

$$\langle φ,ψ\rangle _{H_{D}^{s}}=\left\langle \left(1+A_{0}\right)^{s/2}φ,\left(1+A_{0}\right)^{s/2}ψ\right\rangle _{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}$$

see[Gri67].Then,forσ∈[0,1],Xσdenotes the space

$$X^{σ}=D\left(A_{0}^{1+σ}\right)xD\left(A_{0}^{σ}\right)=H_{D}^{2+2σ}xH_{D}^{2σ}\tag{2.1}$$

equipped with the natural inner product. By Stone's theorem,A generates a unitary C0-group on X and D(A). By linear interpolation, so it does onXσfor anyσ∈[0,1].

We setF∈C0(to be the map

$$F:(u,v)\in Xlongmapsto(0,-f(·,u))\in X.$$

IfU0=(u0,u1)∈XandU=(u,∂tu),we can recast our equation (1.1) as

$$\left\{\begin{array}{c}\partial _{t}U=\boldsymbol {A}U+F(U),\\ U(0)=U_{0},\end{array}\right.\quad \quad t>0$$

We first state the global well-posedness for solutions of (1.1) under the asymptotic defocusing condition(1.6).

<!-- 8 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

**Proposition 2.1.Let**f∈C4(RxM,R)satisfy (1.6). For anyT&gt;0,anyU0=(u0,u1)∈X=HD2xL2(M) andh∈L1([0,T],L2(M)) there exists a unique solutionU(t)=(u(t),∂tu(t))∈C0([0,T],X)of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial _{t}^{2}u+\Delta _{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=h\\ u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0\\ \left(u,\partial _{t}u\right)(0)=\left(u_{0},u_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad x\in \mathcal {M},\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M}),\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{2.2}$$

Moreover the flow map

$$\left\{\begin{array}{rl}XxL^{1}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)&longrightarrowC^{0}([0,T],X)\\ \left(U_{0},h\right)&longmapstoU\end{array}\right.$$

is Lipschitz on bounded sets.

Proof. SinceHD2is an algebra ford≤3,for anyu,vwith\|u\|HD2\|u\|HD2≤R,by classical Sobolev embedding,

$$\|f(·,u)-f(·,v)\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}\leq \left\|\int _{0}^{1}f_{s}^{\prime }(·,v+τ(u-v))(u-v)dτ\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}\leq C(R)\|u-v\|_{H_{D}^{2}}$$

Therefore, F is Lipschitz on the bounded sets of X and thus the local well-posedness can be established by classical Picard iteration, see for instance [Paz83, Theorem 1.4].

To globalize the solution we need to obtain some suitable bounds on the energy. First, given that M is compact and assumption (1.6)forces that S↦V(·,s)is non-increasing on(-∞,-R) and non-decreasing in(R,+∞), it follows that V attains a global infimum onM×R,that is, inf(x,s)∈MxRV(x,s)≥-C0for someC0∈R.Therefore,for anyU∈Xit holds

$$E(U)\geq \frac {1}{2}\|U\|_{X}^{2}-\text {meas}(\mathcal {M})C_{0}.\tag{2.3}$$

Second,we note that fors≤t,the energy E satisfies

$$E(U(t))-E(U(s))=\int _{s}^{t}\int _{\mathcal {M}}h\partial _{t}udxdτ,$$

from which followS

$$E(U(t))\leq E(U(s))+C\|\|_{L^{1}\left([s,t],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}\sup _{τ\in [s,t]}\left(E(U(τ))+C_{1}\right)^{1/2}\tag{2.4}$$

withC1:=meas(M)C0. By Gronwall's inequality, we readily get that the energy remains bounded in bounded intervals. So, both estimates (2.3) and (2.4) give us a bound on the norm for the solution to our equation. Given that f is smooth and satisfies f(x,0)=0for every 3∈∂M, Theorem A.2 give us\|F(U)\|X≤C(\|u\|L∞)\|U\|X. So, if U belongs to a bounded set in X,the Sobolev embeddingHDhookrightarrowL∞tells us that the energy remains bounded and thus does not blow up in finite time.

Finally, the continuity estimate follows by using Duhamel's formula along with the fact that the nonlinearity is Lipschitz on bounded sets and a Gronwall type argument. \sqcup

Remark 2.2. Note that the conditionΔu.|∂M=0which does not make sense at this level of regularity is meant as an extension of the related semigroup. The nonlinear equation (2.2) is meant in the sense of the Duhamel formula.

Let us introduce the linear bounded operator

$$\mathbf {B}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}0&0\\ 0&-γ^{2}(x)\end{array}\right)$$

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 9 -->

so that the damped system (1.2) can be rewritten as

$$\left\{\begin{array}{c}\partial _{t}U=(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})U+F(U),\quad t>0,\\ U(0)=U_{0},\end{array}\right.$$

With minor modifications, we can establish a similar result for the damped system (1.2).

**Proposition** 2.3. Let f satisfy (1.6). For anyU0=(u0,u1)∈X=HD2xL2(M) there exists a unique solutionU()=(u(),∂u())∈C0(R,Xof the dampedplate equation (1.2). Moreover, its energyE(u,∂tu)is non-increasing in time and for anyT&gt;0,the flow mapU0∈XlogmapstoU∈C0([-T,T],X)is Lipschitz on bounded sets.

Proof. The only modification on the sketch of the previous proof is that now the energy is dissipative and it satisfies

$$\frac {d}{dt}E(U)=-\int _{\mathcal {M}}γ^{2}(x)\left|\partial _{t}u\right|^{2}dx$$

The remaining details are filled in a similar fashion. ☐

2.2. **Nonlinearity** **properties.** In what follows,we denote byBR(Y)the ball of radiusR&gt;0centered at 0 of some Banach space Y. We now show that the nonlinearity is more regular than it seems to be as a map defined on the energy space X.

**Proposition 2.4.**f∈C4(M×R,R)withf(x,0)=0forx∈∂M.For everyσ∈[0,1),F maps any bounded set iBofX=HD2xL2into a bounded setF(B) containedinXσ=(H2+2σ∩HD2)xHD2σFurthermore,F(B)is relatively compact inXσ.Moreover,for anyU,V∈Bthen

$$\|F(U)-F(V)\|_{X^{σ}}\leq C(\mathcal {B})\|U-V\|_{X}\tag{2.5}$$

Proof. Sinced≤3andf∈C4(M×R,RR))withf(x,0)=0forx∈M,Theorem A.1 shows that f:HD2→HD2is well-defined and\|f(u)\|HD2≤C(\|u\|L∞(M))\|u\|HD2.Thus,for anyσ∈[0,1),since the compact embeddingHD2hookrightarrowHD2σholds by Rellich-Kondrachov's theorem, we get that the set {f(u)|(u,v)∈B}is relatively compact inHD2σ. Thus, due to the structure of the nonlinearity, we readily see that F maps bounded sets of X into relatively compact sets ofσ

Let us write

$$f(·,u)-f(·,v)=(u-v)\int _{0}^{1}\left(f_{s}^{\prime }(·,v+τ(u-v))-f_{s}^{\prime }(·,0)\right)dτ+(u-v)f_{s}^{\prime }(·,0)$$

Sincefs′∈C3(M×R,R),,by Theorem A.1 we readily getfs′-fs′(·,0):HDν→HDνwithν∈(3/2,2)is well-defined and\|fs′(·,w)-fs′(·,0)\|HDν≤C(\|w\|L∞)\|w\|HDν. In particular, using thatHD2is an algebra and Sobolev embeddings,for anyu,v∈HD2we have

$$\|f(u)-f(v)\|_{H_{D}^{2σ}}\leq C\|u-v\|_{H_{D}^{2}}\left(1+\|u\|_{H_{D}^{2}}+\|v\|_{H_{D}^{2}}\right)$$

where the constant C depends only on f and on the L∞ norm of both n and v. By Sobolev embedding,this estimate directly implies (2.5), since,for anyU,V∈B,

$$\|F(U)-F(V)\|_{X^{σ}}=\|f(u)-f(v)\|_{H_{D}^{2σ}}\leq C\|u-v\|_{H_{D}^{2}}\leq C\|U-V\|_{X}$$

where C only depends on f and B.

<!-- 10 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

**2.3.Linear** **observability.** Now we state a suitable observability inequality for the linear plate equation, which will be employed later on. Obtaining such observability inequality follows from Lebeau's strategy [Leb92] and the observation that, under hinged boundary conditions, the bi-Laplace operator is precisely the square root of the Dirichlet-Laplace operator. Even though Lebeau's was first concerned with obtaining observability of linear plates under the GCC, as long as observability for Schrödinger holds true, this abstract strategy allows to transfer observability results known from the linear Schrödinger equation, to the linear hinged plate equation. This ex-plains the geometric assumption on the pair (M,ω) and it notably simplifies the arguments. The following result is borrowed from [LL24, Section 4].

**Proposition** **2.5.** [LL24, Proposition 4.6] LetT0&gt;0 and w satisfying Assumption 1 on (0,.T0) Then,for any0&lt;T0&lt;T&lt;+∞and anybω∈C∞(M)so thatbω=1 on w,there existsC&gt; such that for anys∈[0,2],any(z0,z1)∈HD2xL2(M) and associated solution z of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{rl}\partial _{t}^{2}z+\Delta _{g}^{2}z=0&(t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M}\\ z_{|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta _{g}z_{|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0&(t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\\ (z,\partial _{t}z)(0)=(z_{0},z_{1})&x\in \mathcal {M},\end{array}\right.$$

we have,if∂M≠\emptyset

$$\left\|\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2+s}xH_{D}^{s}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|b_{ω}\Delta _{g}z(t)\right\|_{H_{D}^{s}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\tag{2.6}$$

andif∂M=\emptyset

$$\left\|\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\right\|_{H^{2+s}xH^{s}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|b_{ω}z(t)\right\|_{H^{2+s}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\tag{2.7}$$

The following observability inequality with time-independent potential will be used later on.

**Corollary 2.6.**LetV∈C∞(M) and w satisfying Assumption 1 in time T0&gt;0.Letγ∈C∞(M) be as in Section 1.1.1. Under the hypotheses of Theorem 2.5,for anyT&gt;T0 there existsC&gt;0such that,for any(z0,z1)∈HD2xL2(M) and associated solution z of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}z+\Delta_{g}^{2}z+\beta z+V(x)z=0\\
\left.z\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}=\Delta z_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=0\\
\left(z,\partial_{t}z\right)(0)=\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{2.8}\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

we have

$$\left\|\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\|\gamma z(t)\|_{H_{D}^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\tag{2.9}$$

Proof. Given that the addition of the potential is a compact perturbation, we can deduce the observability estimate (2.9) from the free observability estimate (2.7), which holds whenever aM is empty or not. We briefly sketch the proof, based on a slight variation of the abstract result [DO18, Corollary 1.3, Remark 1.5], where exact controllability can be replaced by observability, according to the duality framework given by the HUM method (see Section 5.1.1 below). Indeed, they provide the necessary arguments to remove the compact term in the proof of the observability inequality in the already classical compactness-uniqueness argument under the presence of a compact perturbation.They rely on the observability of the linear system and a unique continuation result for eigenfunctions, which they refer to as Fattorini-Hautus test.

In what follows we check the required hypothesis. IfZ:=(z∂tz)∈C0([0T]X)then (2.8)can be written as a first order system

$$\left\{\begin{array}{c}\partial _{t}Z=(\boldsymbol {A}+\boldsymbol {V})Z,\quad t\in (0,T)\\ Z(0)=Z_{0},\end{array}\right.$$

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 11 -->

whereA is given by

$$\boldsymbol {V}:=\left(\begin{array}{cc}0&0\\ -V(x)&0\end{array}\right)$$

First, by Theorem 2.5 observability holds for anyT&gt;T0for A with observation operatorC(ψ1,ψ2)= γ(x)ψ1.Second,note that AV:=A+VsatisfiesD(AV)=D(A)and thatV∈L(X)is a compact operator. Then, it only remains to check the unique continuation property for eigenfunctions ofAV ifAV(vλwλ)=λ(vλwλ)andC(vλwλ)=0with(vλwλ)∈Xandλ∈C,then(vλwλ)=(00) On the one hand, the conditionAV(vλ,wλ)=λ(vλ,wλ)leads to

$$\left\{\begin{array}{c}-\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta +V(x)\right)v_{λ}=λ^{2}v_{λ}\\ v_{λ}=0,\end{array}\right.\quad \quad x\in ω.\quad x\in \mathcal {M}$$

By elliptic regularity and bootstrap, we can show thatvλ∈H3∩HD1(M). In particular, we can apply the unique continuation for (evolution) plate operators Theorem 3.1 below to show that vλ=0. On the other hand,forλ≠0,we havewλ=λvλ=0, and forλ=0we directly obtain wλ=0. This proves that linear observability holds in timeT&gt;T0for AVwith observation operator C,that is, estimate (2.9) holds. ☐

Remark 2.7. Regarding the unique continuation for eigenfunctions of the bi-Laplace operator,we refer to Le Rousseau and Robbiano [LRR20] and the references therein, where more complicated situations are addressed.

2.4. **About** **the** **stabilization** **strategy.** The following well-known result gives us a criterion to establish the nonlinear energy decay for defocusing solutions of (1.2) as stated in the introduction.

**Lemma** **2.8.** Let f satisfy the defocusing assumption (1.3). The property (ED) holds if and only if there existsT&gt;0 such that for everyE0,there exists a constantC&gt;0such that

$$E(U(0))\leq C(E(U(0))-E(U(T)))=C\iint _{[0,T]x\mathcal {M}}γ^{2}(x)\left|\partial _{t}u(t,x)\right|^{2}dxdt\tag{2.10}$$

for all solutions u of (1.2) withE(U(0≤E0

Proof. If (ED) holds, then forT&gt;0large enough so that1-Ce-λT&gt;0

$$E(U(0))-E(U(T))\geq \left(1-Ce^{-λT}\right)E(U(0))$$

If (2.10)holds,usingE(U(T))≤E(U(0)),we get directly that

$$E(U(T))\leq \frac {C}{C+1}E(U(0))$$

Consequently,

$$E(U(kT))\leq \frac {C}{C+1}E(U((k-1)T))\leq \left(\frac {C}{C+1}\right)^{2}E(U((k-2)T))\leq \cdots \leq C_{1}^{k}E(U(0))$$

withC1&lt;1.Ift∈[kT,(k+1)T),observing that $k=\left\lfloor \frac {t}{T}\right\rfloor >\frac {t}{T}-1$ and 10 $\frac {1}{C_{1}}>0$ ,we get

$$C_{1}^{k}=\exp \left(k\ln C_{1}\right)=\exp \left(-k\ln \frac {1}{C_{1}}\right)\leq \exp \left(-\ln \frac {1}{C_{1}}-\frac {t}{T}\ln \frac {1}{C_{1}}\right)=\frac {1}{C_{1}}\exp \left(-\frac {\ln \frac {1}{C_{1}}}{T}t\right)$$

Consequently,for some constantsC&gt;0andλ&gt;0,we get

$$E(U(t))\leq E(U(kT))\leq Ce^{-λt}E(U(0))$$

<!-- 12 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

This link in between exponential stabilization and observability inequalities was first introduced by Haraux [Har89] for second order linear systems. In view of this strategy and following the same strategy of proof of Theorem 2.6, we get the observability inequality that leads to the decay of the linear plate with localized damping.

**Proposition** **2.9.** Ifw satisfies Assumption 1, then there exists two positive constantsC&gt;0and λ&gt;0such that for anyσ∈[0,1]andt≥0

$$\left\|e^{t(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}\right\|_{\mathcal {L}\left(X^{σ}\right)}\leq Ce^{-λt}.$$

Remark 2.10. The full range of exponentsσ∈[0,1]is obtained by using suitable energy estimates to establish the caseσ=1and then linear interpolation.

## 3. UNIQUE CONTINUATION AND EQUILIBRIUMS

As stated in the introduction, a crucial property on which the technique relies is a unique con-tinuation property for the nonlinear plate equation (1.1). It is built upon two blocks. The first one is a recent result from [FLL25], stating a unique continuation property for the linear plate equation with time-dependent lower order terms. Actually, this result is stated as a local unique continuation property. However, as pointed out in by the authors, such result can be globalized by propagation through a suitable family of hypersurfaces, whose construction can be found in [LL19, Proof of Theorem 6.7]. The global version is stated below.

**Theorem** **3.1.** [FLL25, Section 1.3.5]LetT&gt;0andM=IntM\sqcup∂Mbe a connected smooth manifold with or without boundary OM. Suppose thatg∈Wloc3,∞(Int(M))is a Riemannian metric on Int M,thatq∈G2((0,T);.Lloc∞(IntM;C)),that b is a one form with all components belonging toG2((0,T);Lloc∞(IntM;C)),and consider the differential operator

$$\mathcal {T}_{\mathrm {b},\mathrm {q}}:=\partial _{t}^{2}+\Delta _{g}^{2}+\mathrm {b}·\nabla _{g}+\mathrm {q}(t,x)$$

whereΔg is the Laplace-Beltrami operator on IntM,∇gthe Riemannian gradient.

Then given w a nonempty open set ofM,we have

$$\left\{\begin{matrix}\mathcal {T}_{\mathsf {b},\mathsf {q}}u=0\text {in}(0,T)\times \text {Int}\mathcal {M}\\ u\in H^{1}_{\mathrm {loc}}(0,T;H^{3}_{\mathrm {loc}}(\text {Int}\mathcal {M}))\quad \Rightarrow u=0\\ u=0\text {in}(0,T)\times \omega \end{matrix}\right.\quad \quad in(0,T)\times \text {Int}\mathcal {M}.$$

Remark 3.2. For a Banach space Y, from the definition of s-Gevrey spaces it follows that any analytic functionf:(0,T)→Yalso belongs toG((0,T),Y)fors&gt;1, see [FLL25, Definition 1.1].

The second block is a propagation of regularity result, or to be more precise, propagation of analyticity in time for solutions which are observed to be analytic in some region from where linear observability holds.

**Theorem** **3.3.** [LL24, Theorem 1.6] Let(Mg)be a compact connected manifold with (or without) boundary of dimensiond≤3.Let\widetildeω⊂Mbe a nonempty open set and suppose that there exists ωSubset\widetildeωsatisfying Assumption 1 for someT0&gt;0.Assume thatf:M×R→R is smooth and real analytic on the second variable.IfT&gt;T0,let(u,∂tu)∈C0([0,T],HD2xL2)be a solution of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial _{t}^{2}u+\Delta ^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=0\\ u_{|\partial \mathcal {M}}=\Delta u_{|\partial \mathcal {M}}=0\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{3.1}\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})$$

so that for any cutoff functionx∈Cc∞(M) whose support is contained in \widetildeω,then t∈(0,T)↦xu(,·)∈H3+ϵ(M)∩HD1(M) is analytic for oneϵ&gt;0.Then∈(0,T)↦(u(,·),∂u(,·))∈H4∩HD1xH2∩HD1is analytic.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 13 -->

Remark 3.4. Observe that in [LL24] this result is not written for f with an extra x-dependency. However,as long as f is smooth with respect to x, the adaptation is straightforward as we only need to ensure that [LL24, Assumption 3] is verified. The latter follows directly by using the nonlinear estimates Theorem A.1 as indicated in [LL24, Proposition 3.2, Proposition 4.1].

This result can be viewed as a finite-time adaptation of abstract results by Hale and Raugel [HR03] in the concerning the regularity of compact attractors. It is likely that analyticity in infinite time holds true after Hale and Raugel's results. However, until now Theorem 1.5 seemed to be hard to obtain because, for instance, no unique continuation result for linear plates was available under non-restrictive geometric assumptions. In this direction, the recent result (3.1) of [FLL25] underpins the importance of our resulIt about propagation of analyticity in finite time. This property is the crucial not only because it enables us to use unique continuation for linear plates Theorem 3.1, but also for deriving the corresponding observability inequality for the nonlinear equation.

With these two results at hand, we are in position to prove the unique continuation property stated in the introduction.

Proof of Theorem 1.5.LetU(t)=(u(t),∂tu(t))be a solution of (1.1) in C0([0,T],Xσ). By as-sumptionωSubset\widetildeωand w satisfies Assumption 1. Letx∈Cc∞(M)be a smooth compactly supported function in \widetildeω such that x=1 on w and $\partial _{\vec {n}}x=0$ on ∂M. By hypothesis,in [0,T]x\widetildeωwe have ∂tu=0and thus

$$\Delta _{g}^{2}(xu)+\beta (xu)+xf(x,u)=\left[\Delta _{g}^{2},x\right]u$$

By elliptic regularity and bootstrap (see, for instance [GT01, Proposition 9.19]), we readily get that,for some smallϵ&gt;,the applicationt∈(0T)↦xu(t·)∈H3+ϵ(M)∩HD1(M is well-defined and analytic, as it does not depend on t. Thus Theorem 3.3 applies and we get that ∈(0T)↦U()∈H4∩HD1xHD2is analytic.

Since u is smooth with respect to t and f is smooth in both variables,by writing

$$\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta \right)u=-\partial _{t}^{2}u-f(x,u)$$

we get that Δg2u∈L2(M)and sou∈H4(M). We differentiate the above equation to obtain

$$\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta \right)^{2}u=\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta \right)\left(-\partial _{t}^{2}u-f(x,u)\right)=-\partial _{t}^{2}\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta \right)u-\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta \right)f(x,u)\quad =\partial _{t}^{4}u+\partial _{s}f(x,u)\partial _{t}^{2}u+\partial _{s}^{2}f(x,u)\left(\partial _{t}^{2}u\right)^{2}-\left(\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta \right)f(x,u)$$

which shows that n belongs to H8(M). This process can be repeated as many times as wanted, so by classical Sobolev embedding we get thatu=u(t,x) is smooth with respect to x. In particular, (t,x)∈(0,T)xInt(M)↦u(t,x)belongs toC∞((0,T)×I(M)) Setz=∂tu and observe that z solves

$$\left\{\begin{aligned}\partial_{t}^{2}z+\Delta_{g}^{2}z+\beta z+f_{s}^{\prime}(x,u)z&=0\\
z_{\partial \mathcal{M}}=\Delta z_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}&=0\\
z&=0\end{aligned}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{3.2}\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]xω.$$

By the previous discussionq:(t,x)↦f′(x,u(t,x)) is bounded, is not only smooth in x but also analytic in t and in particular, Gevrey 2 in time, see Theorem 3.2. As u is smooth in both variables, so is z and we can apply Theorem 3.1 to get that z=0everywhere. This in turn means that u(t,x)=u(x)is constant in time and henceforth it solves

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\Delta _{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=0\\ u=\Delta u=0\end{array}\right.\quad \quad c\in \partial \mathcal {M}\quad x\in \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\tag{3.3}$$

Moreover,multiplying the latter equation by n and integrating by parts leads us to the identity

$$0\leq \int _{\mathcal {M}}\left(\left|\Delta _{g}u(x)\right|^{2}+\beta |u(x)|^{2}\right)dx=-\int _{\mathcal {M}}u(x)f(x,u(x))dx$$

<!-- 14 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

Under the assumption thatsf(x,s)≥0for all(x,s)∈M×R,the above identity,the connectedness of M and the boundary condition imply that u=0everywhere. In the case∂M=\emptyset,we get

$$0\leq \int _{\mathcal {M}}\left(\left|\Delta _{g}u(x)\right|^{2}+\beta |u(x)|^{2}\right)dx=-\int _{\mathcal {M}}u(x)f(x,u(x))dx\leq -α\int _{\mathcal {M}}|u(x)|^{2}dx$$

which directly impliesu=0everywhere.

## 4. STABILIZATION AND LONG TIME DYNAMICS

4.1. **Observability** **inequality.** By Theorem 2.8, the stabilization result Theorem 1.2 follows directly once the corresponding observability inequality is established, which is the content of the following result. We employ an strategy introduced by Dehman, Lebeau and Zuazua [DLZ03], where microlocal propagation tools and unique continuation are used in a key fashion to stabilize the subcritical wave equation inR3. Here, following a modification of these ideas for the wave equation introduced by Laurent and the author [LL24, Section 3.5], we use the linear observability inequality and the compactness properties of the nonlinearity to perform the usual propagation of compactness argument. We point out that, for the subcritical1 wave equation, Joly and Laurent [JL13] introduced a similar modification based on the decay of the linear semigroup, which led them to rely on a unique continuation property in infinite time. In our case, if we run such argument we might be able to obtain the observability inequality for someT&gt;0. However, here we obtain the observability for anyT&gt;T0given that the Schrödinger equation is L2-observable in time T0&gt;0. This further highlights the importance of the unique continuation property in finite time Theorem 3.3.

**Theorem** **4.1.** Assume w satisfies Assumption 1 for some T0&gt;0. Assume that f is analytic in the second variable and defocusing,that is, satisfying (1.3). Then,for anyT&gt;T0 andE0&gt;0, there existsC&gt;0so that for any(u0u1)∈HD2xL2(M,with\|(u0,u1)\|HD2xL2≤E0,the unique solution of (1.2) satisfies

$$E(U(0))\leq C\iint _{[0,T]x\mathcal {M}}γ^{2}(x)\left|\partial _{t}u(t,x)\right|^{2}dxdt.\tag{4.1}$$

Proof. WVe argue by contradiction. Let(u0,n,u1,n)∈HD2xL2(M)be a sequence of initial data with \|(u0,n,u1,n)\|HD2xL2≤E0,so that the unique solution(un,∂tun)∈C0([0,T],X)to (1.1) satisfies

$$\iint _{[0,T]x\mathcal {M}}γ^{2}(x)\left|\partial _{t}u_{n}(t,x)\right|^{2}dxdt\leq \frac {1}{n}E\left(U_{0}^{n}\right)\leq \frac {1}{n}E_{0}.\tag{4.2}$$

Up to taking a subsequence, we can assume that (u0,n,u1,n)converges weakly to(u0,u1)∈HD2xL2. The global well-posedness theory for (1.2) and the defocusing assumption (1.3) implies that(un)is globally bounded inC0([0,T],HD2),see Theorem 2.1. In particular, up to a subsequence, we can assume thatunconverges weakly to someu∈L2([0T]HD2)for this topology.

Step 1. Identification of the weaklimit. The first step is to prove thatU=(u,∂tu)is solution of the undamped nonlinear equation with initial dataU0=(u0,u1)∈HD2xL2.The well-posedness theory allows us to consider the following nonlinear solution with initial dataU0

$$V(t)=e^{t(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}U_{0}+\int _{0}^{t}e^{(t-s)(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}F(V(s))ds=V_{\text {lin}}+V_{\text {Nlin}},$$

and we want to prove thatU=V

Since the sequence(un,∂tun)is bounded inC0([0,T],HD2xL2), as an application of Aubin-Lions Lemma (see [Sim87,Corollary 4]),we obtain that,for any0&lt;η&lt;1,still up to a subsequence which we denote the same,un converges strongly to n in C0([0,T],H2-η(M)).By leveraging that d≤3and thus we are working on an algebra, by Sobolev embedding if we take0&lt;η&lt;1/2we get

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 15 -->

thatun converges strongly to n in L∞([0,T]×M). Moreover, by estimates similar to the ones in Theorem 2.4, we obtain

$$\left\|f\left(·,u_{n}\right)-f(·,u)\right\|_{L^{1}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}\leq \left\|\int _{0}^{1}f_{s}^{\prime }\left(·,u_{n}+τ\left(u_{n}-u\right)\right)\left(u_{n}-u\right)dτ\right\|_{L^{1}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}$$

$$\leq C\left\|u_{n}-u\right\|_{L^{\infty }([0,T]x\mathcal {M})}$$

whereC&gt;0 is a constant that depends on f and on E0. The previous estimate implies that f(un)→f(u)strongly inL1([0,T],L2(M)). From the Duhamel's formulation

$$U^{n}(t)=e^{t(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}U_{0}^{n}+\int _{0}^{t}e^{(t-s)(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}F\left(U^{n}(s)\right)ds=U_{\text {lin}}^{n}(t)+U_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}(t),\tag{4.3}$$

with

$$\left\|U_{\mathrm {Nlin}}^{n}-V_{\mathrm {Nlin}}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\underset {n\rightarrow \infty }{longrightarrow}0.\tag{4.4}$$

Since the mapU0↦e·(A+B)U0is linear continuous from X intoL2([0,T],), it is continuous for the corresponding weak topology as well. Therefore,sinceU0nconverges weakly toU0inX,e·(A+B)U0n converges weakly toe·(A+B)U0=VlininL2([0,T],X). It follows thatUnconverges weakly to V and consequentlyU=V.

We obtained thatU=(u,∂tu)∈C0([0,T],HD2xL2(M))is a solution of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}u+\Delta_{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=0\\
u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=\Delta u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=0\\
\left(u,\partial_{t}u\right)(0)=\left(u_{0},u_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M}$$

Let \widetildeω be the set of points such thatγ(x)&gt;γ0/2&gt;0,which satisfiesωSubset\widetildeωgiven that γ is smooth and M is compact. Indeed, the set $ω_{0}:=\left\{x\in \mathcal {M}|γ(x)\geq \frac {2}{3}γ_{0}>0\right\}$ is closed (hence compact) and satisfies w⊂ω0⊂\widetildeω.Using(4.2) and taking weak limit in the equation satisfied by(un,∂tun) by looking at the equation satisfied by(u,∂u),we readily get∂tu=0on[0,T]×\widetildeω.As we are assumming that f is defocusing, we are then in position to apply the unique continuation property Theorem 1.5, from which we deduce thatu=0.In particular,VNlin=0and from (4.4) we get

$$\left\|U_{\mathrm {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\underset {n\rightarrow \infty }{longrightarrow}0.\tag{4.5}$$

Using the linear observability inequality from Theorem 2.5 and Duhamel's formula (4.3), we have

$$\left\|U_{0}^{n}\right\|_{X}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}u_{\text {lin}}^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\quad \leq 2C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}u^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt+2C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}u_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt$$

From (4.2) and (4.5) together, we obtain $α_{n}:=\left\|U_{0}^{n}\right\|_{X}\underset {n\rightarrow \infty }{longrightarrow}0.$ 

Step 2. Linearization argument. Since the sequence of initial data converges strongly to 0, we can linearize to consider the nonlinearity as a small perturbation of the linear problem, for which we know the observability applies. Let us denote bywn=un/αnwhich is a mild solution of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial _{t}^{2}w_{n}+\Delta _{g}^{2}w_{n}+\beta w_{n}+α_{n}^{-1}f\left(x,α_{n}w_{n}\right)=0\\ w_{\left.n\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta w_{\left.n\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0\\ \left(w_{n},\partial _{t}w_{n}\right)(0)=\left(w_{n,0},w_{n,1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

with\|(wn,0,wn,1)\|X=1.By expandingf(·,s)=f(·,0)+f′(·,0)s+r(·,s),the nonlinearityfn(s):= αn-1f(αns)can be written asfn(s)=f′(0)s+αn-1r(αns).By Theorem A.2 and Sobolev embedding,

<!-- 16 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

rn(s):=αn-1r(αns)satisfies, uniformly inn∈N

$$\left\|r_{n}\left(w_{n}\right)\right\|_{L^{\infty }\left([0,T],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}\leq Cα_{n}\left\|w_{n}\right\|_{C^{0}\left([0,T],H_{D}^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}^{2}$$

Introducing

$$\widetilde {\boldsymbol {A}}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}0&I\\ -A_{0}^{2}-\beta -f^{\prime }(·,0)&0\end{array}\right)\quad \text {and}\quad R_{n}\left(\begin{array}{c}u\\ v\end{array}\right)=\left(\begin{array}{c}0\\ -r_{n}(u)\end{array}\right)$$

we write

$$W^{n}(t)=e^{t\tilde {\boldsymbol {A}}}W_{0}^{n}+\int _{0}^{t}e^{(t-s)\tilde {\boldsymbol {A}}}R_{n}\left(W^{n}(s)\right)ds=W_{\text {lin}}^{n}+W_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}.$$

By employing the observability inequality of Theorem 2.6 with potentialV=f′(·,0)for the linear part and the previous estimates for the nonlinear part,we obtain

$$\begin{array}{l}\left\|W_{\text {lin}}^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\leq C,\\ \left\|W_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\leq Cα_{n}\left\|W^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}^{2},\end{array}$$

withC=C(E0,T)&gt;0. By putting together both bounds, we obtain

$$\left\|W^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\leq C+Cα_{n}\left\|W^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}^{2}$$

A bootstrap argument [BG99, Lemma 2.2] allows us to prove that, for n large enough,

$$\left\|W^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\leq 2C,$$

which, in turn, gives us

$$\left\|W_{\mathrm {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}\leq Cα_{n}$$

We now treat the linear part by using the observability estimate from Theorem 2.6. Thus,

$$\left\|\left(w_{0,n},w_{1,n}\right)\right\|_{X}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}w_{\text {lin}}^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\quad \leq 2C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}w^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt+2C\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}w_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt$$

For the first term, (4.2) with the scalingwn=un/αnandαn=\|(u0,n,u1,n)\|Xcan be written as

$$\iint _{[0,T]\times \mathcal {M}}\gamma ^{2}(x)\left|\partial _{t}w_{n}(t,x)\right|^{2}dxdt\leq \frac {1}{n}.$$

Concerning the second term, by energy estimates we get

$$\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}w_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\leq C\left\|W_{\text {Nlin}}^{n}\right\|_{C^{0}([0,T],X)}^{2}\leq Cα_{n}^{2}.$$

Putting them all together gives us

$$E\left(w_{0,n},w_{1,n}\right)\leq \frac {C}{n}+Cα_{n}^{2}.$$

ThereforeE(w0,n,w1,n)→0asn→∞,which is a contradiction with the initial assumption since 1=\|(w0,n,w1,n)\|X≤CE(w0,n,w1,n)for everyn∈N ☐

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 17 -->

**4.2. Existence of a compact global attractor.** From now on, we will assume that f satisfies the asymptotic condition (1.6),that is,

f(x,0)=0for everyx∈∂M and sf(x,s)≥0 for every (x,s)∈Mx{|s|≥R}

We recall that(e,0)∈HD2×L2(M)is an equilibrium point of (1.1) if it satisfies

$$\left\{\begin{aligned}\Delta_{g}^{2}e+\beta e+f(x,e)&=0\\
e_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=\Delta e_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}&=0\end{aligned}\right.\quad \quad x\in \partial \mathcal {M}.\tag{4.6}\quad x\in \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})$$

4.2.1. The dynamical system is asymptotically smooth. This property follows exactly as in [JL13, Proposition 4.1]. We recall the argument for the sake of completeness.

**Proposition** **4.2.** Assume w satisfies Assumption 1. Letf∈C4(MxR,R)satisfying(1.6),let (u0n,u1n)n∈N be a sequence of initial data which is bounded in X and let(un)n∈Nbe the corresponding solutions to the damped plate equation (1.2).Let(tn)n∈Nbe a sequence of times such thattn→+∞asn→∞

Then,there exist subsequences(unk)kand(tnk)kand a global solutionU∞=(u∞,∂tu∞)of(1.2)defined for allt∈Rsuch that

$\left(u_{n_{k}},\partial _{t}u_{n_{k}}\right)\left(t_{n_{k}}+t\right)\underset {k\rightarrow \infty }{longrightarrow}\left(u_{\infty },\partial _{t}u_{\infty }\right)(t)$ inX

Moreover,the solutionU∞ is globally bounded in X and the energyt↦E(U∞(t))is constant. Proof. By Duhamel's formula we have

$$U_{n}\left(t_{n}\right)=e^{t_{n}(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}U_{n}(0)+\int _{0}^{t_{n}}e^{\left(t_{n}-s\right)(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}F\left(U_{n}(s)\right)ds$$

By Theorem 2.9, the semigroup decays exponentially and thus the sequenceetn(A+B)Un(0)goes to zero in X. Second, we need to show that the nonlinear term \int_{0}^{t_{n}}eft(t_{n}-s\right)(\boldsymbol{A}+\mathbf{B})}t(U_{n}(s)\right)dsis compact. Using the energy estimate (2.3), we readily see thatUn(s)is uniformly bounded in X for≥0.For σ∈[01fixed from now onward, due to Theorem 2.4,F(Un(s))belongs to a bounded set ofXσ,say, to a ball of radiusR=R(σ)&gt;0. Since the semigroup decays exponentially,e(n-)(A+B)F(Un()) has an integral in[0,tn]and thus is uniformly bounded inXσas well.Indeed,for eachn∈N

$$\left\|\int _{0}^{t_{n}}e^{\left(t_{n}-s\right)(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}F\left(U_{n}(s)\right)ds\right\|_{X^{σ}}\leq \int _{0}^{t_{n}}\left\|e^{\left(t_{n}-s\right)(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}\right\|_{\mathcal {L}\left(X^{σ}\right)}\left\|F\left(U_{n}(s)\right)\right\|_{X^{σ}}ds\quad \leq \frac {R}{λ}\left(1-e^{-λt_{n}}\right)$$

from which desired bound follows. By Rellich-KondrachovXσis compactly embedded in X, and thus the sequence $\int _{0}^{t_{n}}e^{\left(t_{n}-s\right)(\boldsymbol {A}+\mathbf {B})}F\left(U_{n}(s)\right)$ dsis compact in X. By diagonal extraction,we get a subsequence (Unk(tnk))kthat converges to someU∞(0)in X.LetU∞(t)=(u∞,∂tu∞)(t)be the maximal solution of the damped plate equation (1.2) with initial dataU∞(0)

Lett∈Rand let r ∈Nlarge enough such thattnk+t≥0.Hence,Unk(tnk+t)is well-defined and, moreover,the sequence(Unk(tnk+·))nis uniformly bounded in X. Since our equation is wellposed, the solution is continuous with respect to the initial data. Therefore, fromU(ttk)→U∞(0)in X ask→+∞,we obtain thatU(ttk+t)→U∞(t)in Xask→+∞,for each t such that U∞(t) is well-defined.Moreover,U∞(t)is uniformly bounded as well and it can be extended to a global solutionU∞(t)fort∈R

Finally,for anyt∈Rwe have the identity

$$E\left(U_{n_{k}}\left(t_{n_{k}}+t\right)\right)-E\left(U_{n_{k}}\left(t_{n_{k}}\right)\right)=-\int _{t_{n_{k}}}^{t_{n_{k}}+t}\left\|γ\partial _{t}u_{n_{k}}\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt$$

<!-- 18 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

Using that the energy functional is continuous, non-increasing, and bounded by above and below, we must haveE(Unk(tnk+t))-E(Unk(tnk))→0ask→∞,and thus in the limitE(U∞(t))-E(U∞(0))=0,proving that the energy is constant. ☐

Remark 4.3. Note that for anyT&gt;0we showed that $\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ\partial _{t}u_{\infty }\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt=0$ and thus∂tu∞=0in(0,T)×ω,,which is expected for this kind of trajectories.

4.2.2. Global attractor. Here we hinge on the previous results to show the existence of a compact global attractor.

Proof of Theorem 1.4. From Theorem B.8 there are four properties to be verified. First, the as-ymptotic smoothness of the system was already established in Theorem 4.2.

The positive trajectories of bounded sets are bounded. This propperty follows as we did in the well-posedness result (2.1). We have that,for anyU∈Xit holds

$$E(U)\geq \frac {1}{2}\|U\|_{X}^{2}+\text {meas}(\mathcal {M})\inf _{(x,s)\in \mathcal {M}x\mathbb {R}}V(x,s).$$

Since the energy is non-increasing, by composition estimates for f, the result follows.

The dynamical system is gradient. From the identity (1.4) is clear that the energy satisfiesE(U(≤E(U0)for everyt∈R. Moreover, the relationE(U(t))=E(U0)for everyt∈ means that,for everyT&gt;0it holds

$$\int _{0}^{T}\left\|γ(x)\partial _{t}u\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt=0$$

Therefore,for everyT&gt;0one has

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial _{t}^{2}u+\Delta _{g}^{2}u+\beta u+f(x,u)=0\\ u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta u_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0\\ \partial _{t}u=0\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\widetilde {ω}.\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{4.7}$$

where\widetildeω:={x∈M|γ(x)&gt;γ0/2}is a nonempty open set satisfying Subt\widetildeω.Since w satisfies As-sumption 1 in timeT&gt;T0, we are in position to apply the unique continuation result Theorem 1.5, from which follows that n is an equilibrium point. This combined with the previous item, gives us that the system is gradient.

The set of equilibrium points is bounded. If e is an equilibrium point, by multiplying the equation by e and integrating by parts, we get

$$\frac {1}{2}\int _{\mathcal {M}}\left(\left|\Delta _{g}e\right|^{2}+\beta |e|^{2}\right)dx=-\int _{\mathcal {M}}f(x,e)edx\leq -\text {meas}(\mathcal {M})\inf _{(x,s)\in \mathcal {M}x\mathbb {R}}f(x,s)s.$$

Here,we have bounded by below f as in Theorem 2.1. ☐

## 5. SEMIGLOBAL CONTROLLABILITY

In this section we aim to prove Theorem 1.3 when the defocusing assumption is released by an asymptotic defocusing assumption (1.6). As showed in Section 4.2, there may exist several equilibrium points and stabilization to zero cannot be expected. To deal with this issue, we follow Joly and Laurent [JL14] who introduced a controltechnique that allows us to travel through the attractor,exploiting local control around equilibria and the dynamics of the damped plate equation. **5.1.Local** **controllability.** We now state a local controllability result near equilibrium points, whose proof is given in Section 5.1.2 below.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 19 -->

**Theorem** **5.1.** Let f be analytic in the second variable and satisfying the asymptotic defocusing condition (1.6). Let wSubse\widetildeω be two nonempty open sets such that w satisfies Assumption 1 for someT0&gt;0.ForT&gt;T0and for any equilibrium(,0)∈Xof (1.1),there exists a neighborhood N(e,0)of (e,0) such that,for any(u0,u1) and(u0T,u1T) inN(,0,there exists a controlg∈L∞([0,2T],L2(M))supported in[0,T]×\widetildeωsuch that the unique solution u of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial _{}^{2}+\Delta _{g}^{2}+\beta +f(x,)=\mathbb {1}_{\widetilde {ω}}g\\ _{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta _{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0\\ \left(,\partial _{}\right)(0)=\left(_{0},_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,2T]x\partial \mathcal {M},\tag{5.1}\quad (t,x)\in [0,2T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

satisfies(u,∂tu)(T)=(u0T,u1T)

Let(e,0)∈HD2xL2(M) be an equilibrium of (1.1) and set z=u-e Note that z∈C0([0,T],HD2)∩C1([0,T],L2(M)and it satisfies

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}z+\Delta_{g}^{2}z+\beta z+\mathfrak{f}(x,z)=g\\
z_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=\Delta z_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=0\\
\left(z,\partial_{t}z\right)(0)=\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad x\in \mathcal {M},\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M}),\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{5.2}$$

with(z0,z1)∈HD2×L2(M)andf(x,z):=f(x,z+e)-f(x,e).Observe thatf(x,0)=0for every x∈Mwhich reduces the problem of local control towards an equilibrium in timeT&gt;0to local control towards 0 for the system (5.2) in timeT&gt;0. Using the reversibility of the uncontrolled plate equation, it is possible to go from an equilibrium towards any desired target in timeT&gt;0, thus explaining that the total control time around equilibria is 2T. Henceforth, we will focus on the(null) control problem (5.2). As usual in control theory, we first study the associated linear control problem through the HUM method, to then establish the control of (5.2) by a perturbation argument introduced by Zuazua [Zua90].

5.1.1. Linear control. With the notations of Section 2, withL2(M)as pivot space, we can introduce the dual spaceHD-2:=(HD2)′equipped with the norm \|φ\|HD-2=\|(1+A0)-1φ\|L2.We can then introduceX′=L2xHD-2,the dual space toX,equipped with the duality product

$$\left\langle \left(φ_{0},φ_{1}\right),\left(ψ_{0},ψ_{1}\right)\right\rangle _{X^{\prime }xX}=\left\langle φ_{1},ψ_{0}\right\rangle _{H_{D}^{-2}xH_{D}^{2}}-\int _{\mathcal {M}}φ_{0}ψ_{1}dx,$$

where〈·,·〉HD-2,HD2denotes the duality pairing betweenHD-2andHD2

**Let** us briflyecall the HUM method. Let us consider the linearized control problem

$$\left\{\begin{array}{c}\partial _{}^{2}v+\Delta _{g}^{2}v+\beta v+\mathfrak {f}_{}^{\prime }(x,0)v=γ^{2}(x)g\\ v_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {}}}=\Delta v_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {}}}=0\\ \left(v,\partial _{}v\right)(T)=(0,0)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\tag{5.3}\quad x\in \mathcal {M},$$

along with the operator

$$S:\quad \quad \begin{array}{cc}L^{2}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\widetilde {ω})\right)&longrightarrow&H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}(\mathcal {M})\\ g&longmapsto&\left(v,\partial _{t}v\right)(0)\end{array}\quad \left(v,\partial _{t}v\right)(0)$$

For any(v0,v1)∈HD2xL2(M),a functiong∈L2([0,T],L2(\widetildeω))is a null-control in timeT&gt;0for (5.3)if(v,∂tv)(0)=(v0,v1). By performing integration by parts we get the following duality characterization: such control exists if and only if

$$\iint _{[0,T]x\mathcal {M}}γ^{2}(x)gΦdxdt=\left\langle \left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right),\left(v_{0},v_{1}\right)\right\rangle _{X^{\prime }xX},\tag{5.4}$$

<!-- 20 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

for any(Φ0,Φ1)∈L2(M)×HD-2,where Φ solves the adjoint problem

$$\left\{\begin{array}{rcl}\partial _{}^{2}Φ+\Delta _{g}^{2}Φ+\beta Φ+\mathfrak {f}_{}^{\prime }(x,0)Φ=0,\\ Φ_{|\partial \mathcal {M}}=\Delta Φ_{|\partial \mathcal {M}}=0,\\ \left(Φ,\partial _{}Φ\right)(0)=\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right),\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\partial \mathcal {M},\tag{5.5}\quad x\in \mathcal {M}.$$

Remark 5.2. Linear wellposedness theory tell us that(Φ,.∂tΦ)∈C0([0,T],X′)is the only solution of (5.5) such that the linear flow map(Φ0,Φ1)∈X′↦(Φ,∂tΦ)∈C0([0,T],X′)is bounded. See for instance [LM72, Section 3].

In this direction, we identify the adjoint operator to S,

$$\mathcal {S}^{*}:\quad L^{2}(\mathcal {M})xH_{D}^{-2}\quad \left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\quad \begin{array}{ccccc}\boldsymbol {\begin{array}{cccc}\boldsymbol {1}\boldsymbol {1}_{D}&&\boldsymbol {\end{array}}&\boldsymbol {ν}&\boldsymbol {ν}\\ \boldsymbol {)}&&\boldsymbol {\end{array}}&\boldsymbol {ν}&\boldsymbol {ν}\\ \boldsymbol {)}&&\boldsymbol {\end{array}}\quad -\quad \cdot\quad \quad \rightarrow\quad L^{2}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\widetilde {ω})\right)\quad >\quad γ^{2}(x)Φ$$

The HUM operator is given byΛ:=SS*asa map fromL2xHD-2intoHD2×L2(M),defined by

$$Λ\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)=\left(v,\partial _{t}v\right)(0)$$

If V is an isomorphism, then for any initial data (v,∂tv)(0)=(v0,v1)∈HD2xL2(M),the op-timal control that steers (v0,v1) to (0,0) is given by g=SΛ-1(v0,v1),which also belongs to L∞([0,T],L2(M)). Note that such control is just the localization throughγ2(x)to(0,T)x\widetildeωof the adjoint solution Φ to (5.5) with corresponding initial data (Φ0,Φ1)=Λ-1(v0,v1).With this at hand, the duality identity (5.4) reads as

$$\iint _{[0,T]x\mathcal {M}}|γ(x)Φ|^{2}dxdt=\left\langle \left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right),Λ\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\rangle _{X^{\prime }xX},$$

and thus V is an isomorphism if the following observability inequality holds

$$\left\|\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}}^{2}\leq C\int _{0}^{T}\|γΦ\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}^{2}dt\tag{5.6}$$

for every(Φ0,Φ1)∈L2xHD-2. For more details about the HUM operator, we refer for instance to [DL09] for the case of the wave equation.

Having described the HUM method, we point out right away that the exact controllability of the (compactly) perturbed system (5.2) is a consequence of [DO18, Corollary 1.3]. Its verification follows as in Theorem 2.6 above: the observability inequality for the free plate equation inL2xHD-2is obtained by employing Lebeau's strategy in the corresponding Sobolev space (see [LL24, Proposition 4.3]), and the unique continuation with potential follows similarly as well. In particular, the following result isjustified.

**Proposition** **5.3.** Let w be a nonempty open set satisfying Assumption 1 for some T0&gt;0.For anyT&gt;T0,then V is an isomorphism.

5.1.2. Nonlinear control. Here we employ a classical strategy that consists in solving the control problem as a perturbation of the corresponding linear one.

Proof of Theorem 5.1. As previously explained, by time reversibility of the uncontrolled plate, in what follows we just focus on the null controllability of (5.2)in timeT&gt;T0

Our control g will be of the formγ2(x0 where Φ is the solution of the free plate equation as in linear control theory with initial datum(Φ0,Φ1)∈L2xHD-2. We thus consider the solution of the adjoint linear problem

$$\left\{\begin{array}{}\partial _{}^{2}Φ+\Delta _{g}^{2}Φ+\beta Φ+\mathfrak {f}_{s}^{\prime }(x,0)Φ=0,\\ Φ_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=\Delta Φ_{\left.\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}}=0,\\ \left(Φ,\partial _{}Φ\right)(0)=\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right),\end{array}\right.\quad \quad x\in \mathcal {M},\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},$$

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 21 -->

and the nonlinear control problem

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}z+\Delta_{g}^{2}z+\beta z+\mathfrak{f}(x,z)=\gamma^{2}(x)\Phi \\
\left.z\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}=\left.\Delta z\right|_{\partial \mathcal{M}}=0\\
\left(z,\partial_{t}z\right)(T)=(0,0)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\partial \mathcal {M},\quad x\in \mathcal {M}.$$

Step 1. Splitting. Let us introduce the operator

$$Λ_{\text {Nlin}}:L^{2}\times H_{D}^{-2}\quad longrightarrow\quad H_{D}^{2}\times L^{2}\quad \left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\quad \rightarrow\quad Λ_{\mathrm {Nlin}}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right):=\left(z,\partial _{t}z\right)(0)$$

We aim to perform a perturbative argument. Let us splitz=v+Ψ,where Ψ is solution of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{c}\partial _{}^{2}Ψ+\Delta _{g}^{2}Ψ+\beta Ψ+\mathfrak {f}_{}^{\prime }(x,0)Ψ=γ^{2}(x)Φ,\\ \left.Ψ_{|\partial \mathcal {M}}=\Delta Ψ\right|_{\partial \mathcal {M}}=0,\\ \left(Ψ,\partial _{}Ψ\right)(T)=(0,0),\end{array}\right.\quad \quad x\in \mathcal {M}.\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},$$

This corresponds to the linear control and(Ψ,.∂tΨ)(0)=Λ(Φ0,Φ1). The function v is solution of

$$\left\{\begin{array}{r}\partial_{t}^{2}v+\Delta_{g}^{2}v+\beta v+f_{s}^{\prime}(x,0)v=-R(z)\\
v_{l_{\partial \mathcal{M}}}=\Delta v_{\mid \partial \mathcal{M}}=0\\
\left(v,\partial_{t}v\right)(T)=(0,0)\end{array}\right.\quad \quad (t,x)\in [0,T]\times \partial \mathcal {M},\quad (t,x)\in [0,T]x\text {Int}(\mathcal {M})\quad x\in \mathcal {M}.$$

withR(z)=f(x,z)-fs′(x,0)z..SinceΦ∈C([0,T],L2(M)) we readily get that z,v and Ψ belong toC([0,T],HD2)∩C1([0,T],L2(M)).We can write

$$Λ_{\mathrm {Nlin}}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)=\mathcal {K}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)+Λ\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)$$

whereK(Φ0,Φ1)=(v,∂tv)(0)∈HD2xL2(M). Note thatΛNlin(Φ0,Φ1)=(z0,z1)is equivalent to (Φ0,Φ1)=-Λ-1K(Φ0,Φ1)+Λ-1(z0,z1). Let us define the operatorB:L2xHD-2longrigharrowL2xHD-2by

$$\mathcal {B}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)=-Λ^{-1}\mathcal {K}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)+Λ^{-1}\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)$$

Thus the nonlinear problemΛNlin(Φ0,Φ1)=(z0,z1)is equivalent to find a fixed point of B.

Step 2. Fixed point estimates. We first verify that the operator B is compact. This in turns boils down to prove that the operator K from L2xHD-2onto its dual is compact. Indeed, exploiting the regularity of the nonlinearity Theorem 2.4 we readily get thatR(z)∈L1([0,T],HDϵ)for some ϵ&gt;0,which lead us tov∈C0([0,T],HD2+ϵ)∩C1([0,T],HDϵ) with a bound on v in such space in terms of\|(Φ0,Φ1)\|L2xHD-2.First,sincef(x,0)=0on aM,from the regularity estimate (2.5), \|R(z)\|L1([0,T],HDϵ)is bounded by a function of\|(z,∂tz)\|C0([0,T],X),which in turns is bounded by a function of\|Φ\|L1([0,T],L2(M))as a consequence of the well-posedness estimates of Theorem 2.1, from which linear energy estimaes ensure the veracity of the claim.

Aiming to use Schauder's fixed point theorem, we need to findR&gt;0such that

$$\left\|\mathcal {B}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}}\leq R\quad \quad \forall \left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\in \mathbb {B}_{R}\left(L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}\right)$$

Since A is an isomorphism, we have

$$\left\|\mathcal {B}\left(\Phi _{0},\Phi _{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}\times H_{D}^{-2}}\leq C\left(\left\|\mathcal {K}\left(\Phi _{0},\Phi _{1}\right)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2}\times L^{2}}+\left\|\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2}\times L^{2}}\right)$$

To estimateK(Φ0,Φ1),we look at the equation satisfied by v, by energy estimates and Theorem A.2,

$$\left\|\left(v,\partial _{t}v\right)(0)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}}\leq C\|R(z)\|_{L^{1}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}\leq C\|z\|_{L^{\infty }([0,T]x\mathcal {M})}\left\|\left(z,\partial _{t}z\right)\right\|_{C^{0}\left([0,T],H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}\right)}$$

From wellposedness estimates for the nonlinear system satisfied by z (see Theorem 2.1 and Theo-rem 5.2),

$$\left\|\left(z,\partial _{t}z\right)\right\|_{C^{0}\left([0,T],H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}\right)}\leq C\|γΦ\|_{L^{1}\left([0,T],L^{2}(\mathcal {M})\right)}\leq C\left\|\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}}$$

<!-- 22 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

From this and Sobolev embedding, it follows

$$\left\|\mathcal {B}\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}}\leq C\|z\|_{L^{\infty }([0,T]x\mathcal {M})}\left\|\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}}+C\left\|\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}}\quad \leq C\left\|\left(Φ_{0},Φ_{1}\right)\right\|_{L^{2}xH_{D}^{-2}}^{2}+C\left\|\left(z_{0},z_{1}\right)\right\|_{H_{D}^{2}xL^{2}}$$

Thus,provided that\|(z0,z1)\|HD2xL2is small enough, there existsR&gt;0such that B reproduces the ball of radiusR&gt;0inX′. This completes the proof. ☐

5.2. **Semiglobal** **controllability.** As already pointed out, we follow the proof of [JL14]. In what follows,givenU0 and U1 in X,we will writeU0\;U1,to say that,there existT&gt;0and a controlg∈L1([0,T],L2(M))such that the unique solution of (1.5) with initial dataU0satisfies (u,∂tu)(T)=U1.Whenever is needed, the controlg and the amount of time spent T will be explicit.

In the following, we summarize some control properties we will use throughout the following proofs.

Property 1. By Theorem 5.1, the nonlinear system (1.5) is locally controllable in a neighborhood N(0of an equilibrium point (e,0).Upto shrinking the neighborhood, we can assume without loss of generality thatN(e,0)is a ball.

Property 2. IfU(t)=(u,∂tu)(t)is solution to the damped equation (1.2), by translation in time, thenU(t0)\;U(t0+T)with controlg+(t·)=-γ∂tu(t0+t·)acting on [0,7T]

Property 3. By reversing the flow,(u,-∂tu)(t0)\;(u,-∂tu)(t0-T)with controlg-(t,·)=γ∂tu(t0-. t,·) on[0,T]

The following result, called double U-turn argument in [JL14], tell us how to travel inside the attractor around equilibrium points. The main idea is that, since the damped plate has a gradient structure, it drives any state toward an equilibrium forward in time and toward another equilibrium backward in time; alternating these dynamics and combining them with local control, we can make two U-turns near equilibria and thereby connecting any two points of the trajectory inside the compact attractor.

**Proposition 5.4.**IfU(t)=(u,∂tu)(t) is a solution to the damped plate (1.2) that belongs to the compact global attractorAfor each t∈R,thenU(t0)hookrightarrowU(t1)for anyt0t1∈R.

Proof. Ift1≥t0,we just use Property 2.

Ift1&lt;t0,by Theorem 1.4 the damped plate (1.2) generates a gradient dynamical system and thus LaSalle's invariance principle Theorem B.7 implies that there existt-&lt;t1&lt;t0&lt;t+ and two equilibrium pointse-ande+such that U(±) belongs to a neighborhood of(e±,0),de-noted byN(e±,0). Observe that the forward time exists directly from the gradient structure, whereas the backward time additionally uses the compactness of the attractor. Then, by Prop-erty 2, U(t0)\;(u,∂tu)(t+) with controlg=-γ∂tu(t0+·,·). Since(u∂tu)(t+)∈N(0) and such neighborhood is assumed to be a ball centered in(e+,0) (u,-∂tu)(t+)also belongs to such neighborhood and by local control Property 1,(u,∂tu)(t+)\;(u,-∂tu)(t+).By Property 3, (u,-∂tu)(t+)longrightarrow(u,-∂tu)(t-)∈N(e-,0).Once again,as(u,∂tu)(t-)also belongs toN(e-,0),by local control Property 1,(u,-∂tu)(t-)\;(u,∂tu)(t-).Finally,by Property 2,(u,∂tu)(t-)lngrightarrwU(t1) with controlg=-γ2(x)∂tu(t-+·,·) ☐

5.2.1. Reachable set of an equilibrium. GivenU0∈X, let us introduce the reachable set fromU0denoted byR(U0),as the set of pointsU1∈Xsuch thatU0\;U1

**Lemma** **5.5.** The reachable set of an equilibrium point (e,0) is open in X.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 23 -->

Proof.Let U1∈R(e,0).By definition, U(0)=(e,0)\;U(T)=U1 with some controlgE L1([0,T],L2(M))in some timeT&gt;0. By holding them fixed, the wellposedness result of the controlled plate (1.5) implies that the mapΨT:XlonriharrowXwithΨg,T(U0)=U(T;g)is continuous. Moreover, due to the reversibility in time of the uncontrolled plate equation,Ψg,Tis an homeomor-phism in X and thus an open map. In particular, any open neighborhood W of (e,0) is mapped into an open neighborhood 2:=ΨgT(W)of⋅U1. Thus, by definition,for anyU*∈WandUT∈V we haveU*\;UT with control g. Further, up to shrinking these neighborhoods if necessary,by local control Property 1 and reversibility of the uncontrolled plate, there exists a local control g1such that (e,0)\;U*. By applying successive controls g1 and g we have(e,0)\;UT.This proves thatV⊂R(e,0)and the conclusion follows.

In what follows,fort≥0we will denote byStthe nonlinear semiflow induced by the damped plate equation (1.2). After Theorem 2.1,is clear that(St)t≥0is a continuous semigroup on X.

**Lemma** **5.6.** The reachable set restricted to A of an equilibrium point (e,0),namely TR(e,0)∩A is closed in A.

Proof.Let((U1n)n be a sequence in Asuch that(e,0)\;U1nwith controlgnon[0,.Tn]andU1n→U1withU1∈A..Let U be solution of the damped plate (1.2) with initial condition(0=1.Since the damped plate has a gradient structure, there existsT&gt;0large enough and an equilibrium point (\widetildee,0) such that U(T)belongs toN(\widetilde0)neighborhood of (e,0). Bycontinuity of the nonlinear semifloW(St)t≥0there exists N large enough such thatSTU1N∈N(\widetilde,0

We now apply several successive controls. First,by definition(e,0)\;U1N with gN.Second, we use Property 2 to getU1N\;STU1Nwith controlg=γ2(x)∂tu(TN+·,·)andT&gt;0previously chosen,as we arrive to the neighborhood of an equilibrium. Third, by local control Property 1, we haveSTU1NgrightarrwU(T)∈N(\widetilde0) with \widetildeg. Finally,given thatU1∈Aby the U-turn result Theorem 5.4we haveU(T)\;U1with\widetildeg1. Concatenating these controls, we readily get thatU1∈R(e,0)and thusR(e,0) is closed in A.☐

Proof of Theorem 1.3. Let(e,0)∈Abe an equilibrium point of (1.1), which exists due to the gradient structure of the damped plate and thatA≠\emptyset.. After Theorem 5.5 and Theorem 5.6, R(e,0)∩A is both open and closed in A; since the attractor A (see Theorem B.8) is connected andR(,0∩≠\emptyset,this implies thatR(,0∩=. Hence, by the very definition of reachable set,we can go from the neighborhood of any equilibrium point to the neighborhood of any other equilibrium point.

Step 1. Control strategy.LetU0andU1in X. Let Uand\widetildeUbe two trajectories of the damped plate (1.2) withU(0)=U0 and(\widetildeu,-∂t\widetildeu)(0)=U1.Since the system is gradient,forT&gt;0large enough,bothU(T) and\widetildeU(T)belong to neighborhoods of equilibrium pointsN(e1,0)and N(2,0),respectively. In particular, we can assume that these neighborhoods are balls and thus (\widetildeu-∂\widetildeu)(T)∈N(20). The control strategy is the following. FirstU0\;U(T)arriving to a neighborhood of an equilibrium. Then, since the reachable set of any equilibrium covers A, we travel through the attractorU(T)\;(\widetildeu,-∂t\widetildeu)(T) as both states belong to A. Finally,(\widetildeu,-∂t\widetildeu)(T)\;U1by using the backward flow.

Step 2. Uniform control time. Regarding the time of controllability, we now show that it only depends on the size of the initial data. From Theorem 5.1,letτ&gt;0be the time of local control in a neighborhood of an equilibrium point. Note that is does not depend on the chosen equilibrium point. Also, let us denote by 3 the set of equilibria and note that it is compact, since it is closed and contained in the compact attractor A.Letr(e,0)&gt;0denote the radius of local controllability

<!-- 24 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

around an equilibrium(e,0)∈Egiven by Theorem 5.1. Let us introduce forU∈A,,the function

$$λ(U)=\inf \left\{t\geq 0|S_{t}U\in \bigcup _{(e,0)\in \mathcal {E}}\mathbb {B}_{r(e,0)}(e,0)\right\}$$

whereBr(e,0)(e,0) denotes the ball centered at (e,0)of radiusr(e,0)inX.. This quantity is well-defined due to the gradient structure of the damped plate. We claim that there existsϵ&gt;0such thatTA:=supU∈V(A)λ(U)&lt;∞whereV(A) is an ε-neighborhood ofA By contradiction, let us consider the sequencesTn→+∞and(U0n)n⊂Xwithd(U0n,A)≤1/n,such thatStU0ndoes not belong to any ballBr*(e,0) fort∈[0,Tn]. Since A is compact, up to extracting a subsequence, we can assume thatU0n→U0 withU0∈A.Given thatStis gradient,STU0∈Br*(0)for T large enough. By continuity,STU0n∈Br*(e,0) for n large enough. This is a contradiction to the definition of theTn'sand thatTn→+∞.

LetR&gt;0be the radius of the ball to which the data to be controlled belongs to. By the gradient structure of the damped plate, there existsT0=T0(R)such thatST0BR(X)⊂V(A).Let us note that the set of equilibrium points 3 can be covered by the union of the controllability balls Br(e,0)(e,0)where(e,0)runs over ε. By compactness, it can be covered by finitely many of them

$$\mathcal {E}\subset \bigcup _{j=1}^{N}\mathbb {B}_{r\left(e_{j},0\right)}\left(e_{j},0\right)$$

where(ej,0)∈E.. With this at hand, once we are inV(A)we wait at mostTAto enter one of the controllability ballsBr(ej,0)(ej,0). The transition between each two balls costs at mostTA+τand we can perform this transition at most N times. Then, running the backward flow costsT0+TA. We readily see that the total control time is bounded by

$$T_{\max }(R)=2T_{0}(R)+2T_{\mathcal {A}}+N\left(T_{\mathcal {A}}+τ\right),$$

and it only depends on the radius of the given ball. ☐

# APPENDIX A. NONLINEAR COMPOSITION ESTIMATES

The following lemma establishes the regularity of the composition operator, often called Nemytskii operator, with respect to classical Sobolev spaces.

**Lemma A.1.**LetN∈Ng:M×R→RbeaCN+1(M×R,R)function,withg(·,0)=0.If u∈L∞(M)∩Hs(M),withs∈(0,N)theng(·,u)∈L∞(M)∩Hs(M)and\|g(·,u)\|Hs≤C\|u\|Hs, where C only depends on g and\|u\|L∞

The previous Lemma is actually written in [AG91] for function inHs(Rd)andf∈C∞,with no extra dependency in the x-variable. However, first, the same result holds for functions inHs(M) when M is a compact manifold with boundary using the definition of the norm ofHs(M)by partition of unity and sum of the norm inHs(Rd)of the functions in local coordinates and with extension. Second, concerning the requirementg∈CN+1,we only notice that the Meyer's multiplier Lemma [AG91,Lemma 2.2] requires estimates of the derivatives of the multiplier up tolfloorrfloor+1≤N. Since it is applied tog′ in [AG91,Proposition 2.2],it requiresg′∈CN. Third, the only change to the proof when the extra x-dependencyis added, is that new (mixed) derivatives of g need to be taken into account when analyzing the derivatives of the Meyer's multiplier. However, they are all uniformly bounded by a constant depending on\|u\|L∞and on theL∞-norm of derivatives of g up to orderN+1,hence not carrying any dyadic factor depending on the derivative's order at each level. Under these considerations, the proof follows verbatim that of [AG91] and we thus omit it. **Lemma A.2.**g:M×R→RbeaC2(M×R)function.Then,for anyu∈L∞(M)∩L2(M) it holds

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 25 -->

$$\left\|g(·,u)-g(·,0)-g_{s}^{\prime }(·,0)u\right\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}\leq C\|u\|_{L^{\infty }(\mathcal {M})}\|u\|_{L^{2}(\mathcal {M})}$$

where C only depends on g and\|u\|L∞

Proof. The estimate follows by writing a second order development

$$g(·,u)-g(·,0)-g_{s}^{\prime }(·,0)u=\int _{0}^{1}\int _{0}^{τ}g_{s}^{\prime \prime }(·,ηu)u^{2}dηdτ$$

and by using thatgs′′is bounded in the compact setMx{|s|≤\|u\|L∞(M)} ☐

# APPENDIX B. DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS

Let X be a Banach space. A continuous dynamical system or continuous semigroup on X,is a one-parameter family of mappings(St)t∈R*+ from X into X such that

·S(0)=I;

·for anyt,s∈R*+St+s=St∘Ss

·for anyt∈R*+,St∈C0(X,X);

·for anyx0∈X,the applicationt↦Stx0is continuous fromR*+toX

IfR*+is replaced by R above, we say that (St)t∈Ris a continuous group on X.

Forx0∈X,we define the positive trajectoryγ+(x0)={Stx0,t≥0}and the negative trajectory γ-(x0)={Stx0,t≤0}. To describe the asymptotic behavior we use the concept of an w-limit set. The set $ω\left(x_{0}\right):=bigcap_{t>0}\overline {\left\{S(s)\left(x_{0}\right),s\geq t\right\}}$  is called the w-limitset of trajectories emanating from x0.This is the set of points x∈Xso that there exists a sequencetn→+∞so thatS(tn)x0→x. Similarly,the α-limit set is $α\left(x_{0}\right):=bigcp_{\leq 0}\overline {\left\{S()\left(x_{0}\right),\leq \right\}}$ .This is the set of pointsx∈Xso that there exists a sequence(tn)ndecreasing to-∞so thatS(tn)x0 converges to x.

An equilibrium point is a pointe∈Xso thatSte=efor anyt∈R*+. We denote 3 the set of equilibrium points.

**Definition** **B.1.** A nonempty setA⊂Xis called a global attractor of the semigroup ((X,St)if:

· A is a closed, bounded subset of X,

· A is invariant under the semigroup ((X,S)(i.e.,StA=Afor everyt≥0)

· A attracts every bounded subset B of X under the group(X,St),that is for every V neighborhood ofA,there exists t&gt;0so thatStB⊂V.

If it exists, it is given byA={bounded complete orbits of S}

The case where there is a compact global attractor is of particular interest. The existence of such an attractor is an important dynamical property because it roughly says that the dynamics of the PDE for large times may be reduced to dynamics on a compact set, which is often finite-dimensional.

The following properties will be typical of systems that dissipate energy.

**Definition B.2.** Let (X,St)be a dynamical system.

·A closed set B⊂X is said to be absorbing for (X,St)iff for any bounded setD⊂Xthere existst0(D)such thatStD⊂Bfor aallt≥t0(D)

·(X,St)is point dissipative iff there exists a bounded set B so that for anyx0∈X,there existst0(x0)≥0SOthatStx0∈Bforallt≥t0(x0)

·(X,St)is asymptotically smooth iff for any nonempty, closed,bounded set B such that StB⊂Bfort&gt;0there exists a compact setK⊂Bsuch that K attracts B; that is

$$\lim _{t\rightarrow +\infty }d_{X}\left(S_{t}B,K\right)=0,$$

wheredX(A,B)=supx∈AdistX(x,B)

<!-- 26 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

Remark B.3. Note that the definition of asymptotic smoothness is not uniform in the literature, as one may encounter a stronger notion called asymptotic compactness. Here, our reference is [Rau02], where there is no distinction in between these two notions.

We have following sequential characterization of asymptotic smoothness, which is often easier to verify than the aforementioned condition.

**Proposition** B.4. Assume that the Ladyzhenskaya condition holds: for every bounded sequence (xn)n⊂X and every sequencetn→+∞,the sequence(Stnxn)n is relatively compact in X. Then (X,St)is asymptotically smooth.

With these definitions at hand, we have the following result ensuring the existence of a compact global attractor.

**Theorem** **B.5.** [Rau02, Theorem 2.26] The following assertions are equivalent.

·(X,St) admits a global compact attractor A.

·(X,S)is point dissipative, asymptotically smooth, and for any bounded setB⊂X,there existst0≥0such that\bigcupt≥t0StBis bounded.

Moreover,A is connected.

In practical situations, the previous configuration happens in the presence of some decreasing energy.

**Definition B.6.** A functionΦ∈C0(X,R)is a called a strict Lyapunov functional for(X,S)if

·Φ(Stx0)≤Φ(x0)for allt≥0andx0∈X,

·Φ(Stx0)=Φ(x0)for allt∈Rimplies that x0 is an equilibrium point.

The dynamical system(X,,.St)is said to be gradient if it has a strict Lyapunov functional and each bounded positive orbit is precompact.

Although the definition of a gradient system is not uniform in the literature, all of them enjoy the following property as a consequence.

**Theorem** **B.7** (Invariance principle of LaSalle).Let(X,St) be a gradient system. Then,for any x0∈X, ω(x0) is a set of equilibrium points.

If x0is so that the negative trajectoryγ-(x0) is relatively compact, then α(x0) is a set of equilib-rium points.

Concerning compact attractors, Theorem B.5 simplifies to the following in the context of gradient system.

**Theorem** **B.8.** [Rau02, Theorem 4.6] Let(XSt)be a gradient system,so that

·(X,St)is asymptotically smooth,

·for any bounded set B、⊂X,there existst0≥0such that\bigcupt≥t0StBis bounded,

·the set of equilibrium points ε is bounded.

Then (X,St) has a compact global attractor A. Moreover,A is connected.

# REFERENCES

[AG91] Serge Alinhac and Patrick Gérard. Opérateurs pseudo-différentiels et théorème de Nash-Moser. Savoirs Actuels. [Current Scholarship]. InterEditions, Paris; Éditions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Meudon,1991.

[ALM16] Nalini Anantharaman, Matthieu Léautaud, and Fabricio Macià. Wigner measures and observability for the Schrödinger equation on the disk. Invent. Math., 206(2):485-599,2016.

[AM14] Nalini Anantharaman and Fabricio Macià. Semiclassical measures for the Schrödinger equation on the torus. J.Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS),16(6):1253-1288,2014.

<!-- STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION 27 -->

[AR12] Nalini Anantharaman and Gabriel Rivière. Dispersion and controllability for the Schrödinger equation on negatively curved manifolds. Anal. PDE, 5(2):313-338,2012.

[BG99] Hajer Bahouri and Patrick Gérard. High frequency approximation of solutions to critical nonlinear wave equations. Am. J. Math., 121(1):131-175,1999.

[BM25]

Kévin Le Balc'h and Jérémy Martin. Global stabilization of the cubic defocusing nonlinear Schrödinger equation on the torus. Annales de la Faculté des sciences de Toulouse : Mathématiques, Ser. 6,34(3):539-579,2025.

[BZ04] Nicolas Burq and Maciej Zworski. Geometric control in the presence of a black box. J. Amer.Math.Soc., 17(2):443-471,2004.

[CL10] Igor Chueshov and Irena Lasiecka. Von Karmman evolution equations. Well-posedness and long-time dynam-ics. Springer Monogr. Math. New York, NY: Springer, 2010.

[CT09] Nicolae Cîndea and Marius Tucsnak. Local exact controllability for Berger plate equation. Math. Control Signals Syst., 21(2):93-110,2009.

[DGL06] B. Dehman,P. Gérard, and G. Lebeau. Stabilization and control for the nonlinear Schrödinger equation on a compact surface. Math. Z., 254(4):729-749,2006.

[DJN22] Semyon Dyatlov,Long Jin, and Stéphane Nonnenmacher. Control of eigenfunctions on surfaces of variable curvature. J. Am. Math. Soc., 35(2):361-465,2022.

[DL09] B. Dehman and G. Lebeau. Analysis of the HUM control operator and exact controllability for semilinear waves in uniform time. SIAM J. Control Optim., 48(2):521-550,2009.

[DLZ03] Belhassen Dehman, Gilles Lebeau, and Enrique Zuazua. Stabilization and control for the subcritical semi-linear wave equation. Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4), 36(4):525-551,2003.

[DO18] Michel Duprez and Guillaume Olive. Compact perturbations of controlled systems. Math. Control Relat. Fields, 8(2):397-410,2018.

[ET15] Matthias Eller and Daniel Toundykov. Semiglobal exact controllability of nonlinear plates. SIAM J. Control Optim.,53(4):2480-2513,2015.

[FLL25] Spyridon Filippas, Camille Laurent, and Matthieu Léautaud. Unique continuation for Schrödinger operators with partially Gevrey coefficients. Commun. Am. Math. Soc., 5:321-391,2025.

[GLW13] Pelin G. Geredeli, Irena Lasiecka, and Justin T. Webster. Smooth attractors of finite dimension for von Kármán evolutions with nonlinear frictional damping localized in a boundary layer. J. Differ.Equations, 254(3):1193-1229,2013.

[Gri67] Pierre Grisvard. Caractérisation de quelques espaces d'interpolation. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal., 25:40-63, 1967.

[GT01] David Gilbarg and Neil S. Trudinger. Elliptic partial differential equations of second order. Class. Math. Berlin: Springer, reprint of the 1998 ed. edition, 2001.

[GW13] Pelin G. Geredeli and Justin T. Webster. Decay rates to equilibrium for nonlinear plate equations with degenerate, geometrically-constrained damping. Appl. Math. Optim., 68(3):361-390,2013.

[Har89]

[Hör97]

A. Haraux. Une remarque surla stabilisation de certains systèmes du deuxième ordre en temps. (A remark on the stabilization of certain time-dependent systems of second order). Port. Math., 46(3):245-258,1989. Lars Hörmander. On the uniqueness of the Cauchy problem under partial analyticity assumptions. In Ge-ometrical optics and related topics (Cortona, 1996), volume 32 of Progr. Nonlinear Differential Equations Appl., pages 179-219. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, **MA,** 1997.

[HR03] Jack K. Hale and Geneviève Raugel. Regularity, determining modes and Galerkin methods. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9),82(9):1075-1136,2003.

[IM25] Alex Imba and Alberto Mercado. Carleman estimates for an N-dimensional plate equation with clamped boundary conditions and applications. J. Math. Anal. Appl., 549(2):25, 2025. Id/No 129583.

[Isa97] Victor Isakov. On uniqueness in a lateral Cauchy problem with multiple characteristics. J. Differ.Equations, 134(1):134-147,1997.

[Jaf90] S. Jaffard. Contrôle interne exact des vibrations d'une plaque rectangulaire. (Internal exact control for the vibrations of a rectangular plate). Port. Math.,47(4):423-429,1990.

[JL13] Romain Joly and Camille Laurent. Stabilization for thesemilinear wave equation with geometric control condition. Anal. PDE,6(5):1089-1119,2013.

[JL14] Romain Joly and Camille Laurent. A note on the semiglobal controllability of the semilinear wave equation. SIAM J. Control Optim., 52(1):439-450,2014.

[JL20] Romain Joly and Camille Laurent. Decay of semilinear damped wave equations: cases without geometric control condition. Ann. Henri Lebesgue, 3:1241-1289,2020.

[Kom92] Vilmos Komornik. On the exact internal controllability of a Petrowsky system. J. Math. Pures Appl.(9), 71(4):331-342,1992.

<!-- 28 STABILIZATION AND CONTROL OF THE NONLINEAR PLATE EQUATION -->

[Lag89] John E. Lagnese. Boundary stabilization of thin plates, volume 10 of SIAM Stud. Appl. Math. Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1989.

[Lau10] Camille Laurent. Global controllability and stabilization for the nonlinear Schrödinger equation on some compact manifolds of dimension 3. SIAM J. Math. Anal., 42(2):785-832,2010.

[Leb92] Gilles Lebeau. Control of the Schrödinger equation. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9), 71(3):267-291,1992.

[LL88] J. Lagnese and J.-L. Lions. Modelling analysis and control of thin plates, volume 6 of Rech. Math. Appl. Paris etc.: Masson,1988.

[LL19]

Camille Laurent and Matthieu Léautaud. Quantitative unique continuation for operators with partially analytic coefficients. Application to approximate control for waves. J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 21(4):957-1069,2019.

[LL24] Camille Laurent and Cristóbal Loyola. Global propagation of analyticity and unique continuation for semi-linear waves. Preprint, arXiv:2407.02866 [math.AP](2024),2024.

[LM72] J.L. Lions and E. Magenes. Non-homogeneous boundary value problems and applications. Vol. I. Translated from the French by P. Kenneth, volume 181 of Grundlehren Math. Wiss. Springer, Cham, 1972.

[LRR20] Jérôme Le Rousseau and Luc Robbiano. Spectral inequality and resolvent estimate for the bi-Laplace op-erator. J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 22(4):1003-1094,2020.

[LRZ10] Camille Laurent, Lionel Rosier, and Bing-Yu Zhang. Control and stabilization of the Korteweg-de Vries equation on a periodic domain. Commun. Partial Differ. Equations, 35(4):707-744,2010.

[LRZ23] Jérôme Le Rousseau and Emmanuel Wend-Benedo Zongo. Stabilization of the damped plate equation under general boundary conditions. J. Éc. Polytech., Math., 10:1-65,2023.

[LT91] I. Lasiecka and R. Triggiani. Exact controllability of semilinear abstract systems with application to waves and plates boundary control problems. Appl. Math. Optim., 23(3):109-154,1991.

[LTY03]

I. Lasiecka, R. Triggiani, and P. F. Yao. Carleman estimates for a plate equation on a Riemann manifold with energy level terms. In Analysis and applications-ISAAC 2001. Proceedings of the 3rd international congress,Berlin, Germany, August 20-25,2001, pages 199-236. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.

[Mil03] Luc Miller. Escape function conditions for the observation, control, and stabilization of the wave equation. SIAM J. Control Optim., 41(5):1554-1566,2003.

[Mil12] Luc Miller. Resolvent conditions for the control of unitary groups and their approximations. J. Spectr. Theory,2(1):1-55,2012.

[Pau07] Benoît Pausader. Scattering and the Levandosky-Strauss conjecture for fourth-order nonlinear wave equa-tions. J. Differ. Equations, 241(2):237-278,2007.

[Paz83] A.Pazy. Semigroups of linear operators and applications to partial differential equations, volume 44 of Applied Mathematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983.

[Per23] Thomas Perrin. The damped focusing cubic wave equation on a bounded domain. Preprint, arXiv:2310.12644[math.AP](2023),2023.

[Pro25] Antoine Prouff. Observability of the Schrödinger equation with subquadratic confining potential in the Euclidean space. Anal. PDE, 18(5):1147-1229,2025.

[Rau02] G.Raugel. Global attractors in partial differential equations. In Handbook of dynamical systems. Volume 2, pages 885-982. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2002.

[RZ98] Luc Robbiano and Claude Zuily. Uniqueness in the Cauchy problem for operators with partially holomorphic coefficients. Invent. Math., 131(3):493-539,1998.

[Sim87] Jacques Simon. Compact sets in the spaceLP(0,T;B).Ann.Mat. Pura Appl. (4), 146:65-96,1987.

[Tat95] Daniel Tataru. Unique continuation for solutions to PDE's; between Hörmander's theorem and Holmgren's theorem.Comm.Partial Differential Equations, 20(5-6):855-884,1995.

[Tat99] Daniel Tataru. Unique continuation for operators with partially analytic coefficients. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9),78(5):505-521,1999.

[TBE24] Marius Tucsnak, Megane Bournissou, and Sylvain Ervedoza. Exact controllability for systems describing plate vibrations. A perturbation approach. C. R., Math., Acad. Sci. Paris, 362:327-356,2024.

[Wan07] Y. H. Wang. Global uniqueness and stability for an inverse plate problem. J. Optim. Theory Appl., 132(1):161-173,2007.

[Zha01] Xu Zhang. Exact controllability of semilinear plate equations. Asymptotic Anal., 27(2):95-125,2001.

[Zua90] Enrique Zuazua. Exact controllability for the semilinear wave equation. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9),69(1):1-31, 1990.

SORBONNE UNIVERSITÉ, UNIVERSITÉ PARIS CITÉ, CNRS, LABORATOIRE JACQUES-LOUIS LIONS, LJLL, F-75005PARIS, FRANCE

Email address: cristobal.loyola@sorbonne-universite.fr

